1
The Overall Process of Improving Your
Social Skills
AS YOU WORK TO IMPROVE your social skills, you must approach the process in the right way. Many people struggle to improve their social skills not
because they’re up against impossible challenges, but because they
approach the task from the wrong angle and get unnecessarily discouraged.
With the right mind-set, expectations, and approach to improving, you’ll
make more progress. This chapter covers some things you should know
before working on your issues. Chapter 2 troubleshoots some common
questions and concerns people have about improving their social skills.
Figuring out which skills and traits to work on and
which to leave alone
As the Introduction said, you don’t need to change everything about
yourself to do better socially. Of course, you’ll want to address clear-cut
problems that most people would be happy to be rid of—shyness and
anxiety, low self-confidence, unpolished conversation skills, and lack of
knowledge about how to make friends.
The traits listed below can also cause social problems. They’re all
perfectly valid variations from the norm that you shouldn’t have to change.
However, they can lead to practical social inconveniences when either
people misunderstand and look down on the traits, or the traits cause you to
have competing needs.
Acceptable, though sometimes impractical, social differences
Having an introverted personality
Liking to spend a lot of time alone
Not needing or wanting a ton of friends
Being selective when choosing who you want to be friends with
Preferring to socialize for shorter periods of time, and then head
home to relax and recharge your batteries; having a tendency to get
drained by socializing
Being into low-key types of socializing and choosing to avoid rowdy
parties or getting drunk
Preferring to hang back and listen more in conversations, rather than
talking a lot and trying to hold the spotlight
Not having a bubbly, expressive, excitable personality
Being able to take or leave aspects of socializing, like making
chitchat with strangers waiting in a line with you
Preferring your conversations to have lots of substance
Being into “uncool,” non-mainstream hobbies
Not caring about seemingly popular interests like team sports or
reality TV
Living an alternative lifestyle or being part of a non-mainstream
scene or subculture
Having beliefs and values that differ from the mainstream
Having a more quirky personality
As examples, having non-mainstream hobbies may hinder you if they
cause your peers to stereotype you and write you off without giving you a
chance. Liking to spend time alone may cause a conflict in your social
goals. Part of you may want to go out more to make new friends, but your
urge to hang out by yourself may get in the way.
You’ll have to decide for yourself how to approach your acceptable
differences in light of your social goals. Wherever possible, you should be
true to yourself and try to find your niche, which includes looking for
friends who get you and like you for who you are.
No one is socially perfect. As long as they bring enough positives to the
table, they can still get by. If you read a piece of advice in this book you
aren’t crazy about following, ask yourself, “Would it make me happier on
the whole to skip this suggestion? Could I handle the consequences of not
following it?” For example, maybe you’re at peace with having a blunter
communication style and can live with the fact that it will occasionally put
some people off. Maybe you’ll even decide you’re okay with aspects of
your being mildly shy, even if it is technically a “problem.” Be your own
judge of what works for you.
At times you may weigh the pros and cons of a situation and find it suits
you to go along with certain social conventions. For example, in your
perfect world you’d never devote a second of thought to fashion, but you
realize other people value it and so learn to dress a little better. Or you like
spending a lot of time alone, but you push yourself to be around people
slightly more than you’d prefer so you have enough time to practice your
social skills and be with your friends.
You’ll have to decide for yourself where you are and aren’t willing to
compromise. Changing isn’t an option if something violates your deepest
values or you outright dislike it. The pragmatic approach can work if you
feel indifferent toward something and it doesn’t take that much effort to go
along with it. However, there are always going to be parts of the social
world, where even if you realize intellectually it would be practical to go
along with them, you’re just not going to be able to play along. Most people
aren’t going to give up their religious or political views to fit in. As a lighter
example, some men don’t care about sports, but know they’d have an easier
time relating to other guys if they were into them. Some never come to love
sports, but can make themselves follow just enough news about game
results and trades to grease their conversations. Others can’t bring
themselves to do even that, and they’re fine living with the minor hassles
that causes.
Keep an open mind
Although you don’t need to completely change or sell yourself out to do
better socially, you should try to keep an open mind. Be open to new
experiences and the possibility that one day you may develop traits or
come to appreciate things you never thought you’d enjoy. People change
throughout their lives. It’s important to be true to yourself, but not to the
point where you become locked in place and dismiss anything new with
“No, that’s not who I am.” Say a friend invites you to an introductory
salsa class, and you’ve never done much dancing. Even if you sense it’s
not something you’d get a lot out of, it’s too rigid to blindly say, “No,
that’s not me! I don’t like dancing and never will!” You don’t have to
mindlessly try everything everyone suggests, but you never know—you
may actually love partner dancing and just not realize it yet.
Realizing your interpersonal skills don’t have to be
flawless to have a satisfying social life
Countless people in the world have fun social lives even though they’re a
bit shy and insecure, or they sometimes stumble in their conversations, or
they don’t have a ton of fascinating hobbies, or they have a few irksome
personality quirks. Even charismatic people make bad jokes or have their
invites turned down. You don’t need to perfectly execute every skill in this
book 100 percent of the time, and you don’t have to get every last person on
the planet to like you. You just need to be good enough to get by and have
friends who accept you for who you are. You don’t need all of your
interactions to go flawlessly. You just need enough of them to go well that
you can meet your social goals (if you invite ten people to hang out and
only three accept, but they go on to become your good friends, that’s a win).
Practicing your social skills to improve them
Social skills are skills like any other. Reading advice can give you an idea
of what you need to work on and help the learning process go more
smoothly, but in the end you have to practice to really get things down.
You’ve probably socialized for fewer overall hours than many of your
peers, and you have to put in the time to catch up.
That seems obvious, but when it comes to interpersonal skills, some
people think they can be gained all at once through the right trick, insight,
psychology “hack,” or confidence booster. They likely think that because
social skills are non-physical and mundane. People instinctively understand
it takes time to learn complex physical abilities like skiing or drawing.
However, when it comes to socializing, their thought process is, “It’s just
talking. I already know how to do that. So just give me some secret supereffective
conversation formulas, and I’ll be off to the races.”
Additionally, most people have found that navigating a social situation
was easier when they were temporarily more confident than usual. So they
figure there must be a way to be extra-confident all the time. However,
although you can fleetingly become unusually self-assured, there’s no way
to call that feeling up on command or lock it in place for life. There really
are no shortcuts. If there were, they’d be common knowledge, and this book
wouldn’t be needed.
Knowing what are you working on when you practice your social skills
As you practice socializing, you’ll develop the following overall abilities.
In some interactions, you’ll draw on only a few of them, while other
interactions will require you to juggle many at a time.
1) Your ability to think on your feet. When it’s your turn to say
something, you can’t take forever to come up with your response. Also,
aside from the relatively predictable first minute or two, interactions can
quickly go in countless directions. It’s unfeasible to try to plan out
everything you’re going to say ahead of time or map out how to handle
every scenario in advance. The best you can do is learn some general
guidelines and then sharpen your ability to improvise.
2) Your ability to multitask. When you’re interacting with someone, you
have to continually attend to several things at once. The other person is
constantly sending signals through their words, actions, and nonverbal
communication; you have to take it in, evaluate it, and decide on the fly
how to act on your conclusions (“They just said they’re not familiar with
cycling. I’ll have to adjust how I tell my anecdote.”). At the same time, you
have to manage the signals you’re sending (“I’m curious about what time it
is, but I won’t check my watch now because it may make me look like I’m
not interested in their story.”). As you get better at socializing, taking in all
of that information and deciding what to do with it starts to feel less
overwhelming.
3) Your proficiency in a variety of concrete subskills like listening,
asserting yourself, or phrasing an invitation. Like with any skill, at first
you’ll be clumsy and exaggerated when you listen actively, assert yourself,
or extend an invitation, but in time you’ll develop a defter touch and be able
to calibrate your behavior to the situation at hand. For example, when
you’re first getting the hang of listening skills, you may sometimes come
across as an over-the-top therapist. With more practice, you’ll be able to
show you care and that you’re paying attention in a more subtle way.
4) Your comfort level with various subskills, like making eye contact
or starting conversations. Some subskills, like making eye contact or
initiating a conversation, will make you feel nervous or unnatural at first,
but the more you do them, the more normal they’ll feel.
5) Your general knowledge of people, what makes them tick, and how
they tend to react to various things. Every person is different, but with
enough social experience, you’ll start to notice broad patterns you can act
on. For example, you may notice that people who are into a certain hobby
also tend to share the same political beliefs and conversation style, and you
can adjust accordingly.
6) Your knowledge of various social situations and how to navigate
them. You can learn this through firsthand experience or by observing other
people who are more socially experienced than you. It’s possible to find
advice on common scenarios, like how to approach people at a party or turn
down an unreasonable request, but in your day-to-day life, you’ll come
across other scenarios that are too rare and esoteric to end up in any book.
When you come across these novel situations, you may not always handle
them perfectly, but with time you can build up an overall sense about how
to approach them.
7) Your knowledge of the unwritten social guidelines of your
particular culture, subculture, or group of friends, and how to adjust
the general communication-skills rules to fit them. This is another reason
it’s impossible to explain how to deal with every situation ahead of time.
What may be considered an appealing conversation style in one country or
among one circle of friends may be seen as obnoxious elsewhere. The only
way to learn the rules for your social context is to be in it and observe them
for yourself.
8) Constructive mind-sets toward socializing. A well-intentioned, but
unhelpful, variety of social advice is to suggest you adopt useful, but easiersaid-
than-done, mind-sets like, “Don’t care too much about people’s
opinions of you” or “Just go out to have fun and don’t fret about how well
you socialize.” It’s great if you can think like this, but you don’t instantly
acquire those worldviews just by reading they’re good to have. Instead, as
you socialize more and more, you’ll have many small experiences and
successes that show firsthand these are good ways to think, and you’ll
gradually add them into your worldview.
9) Your personal social style. There are some general guidelines for what
makes for a better or worse interaction, but there isn’t a single right way to
socialize. Everyone has his or her own personality and strengths and
weaknesses. There are usually multiple ways to handle any situation. What
works well for another person may not fit you at all. Your friend may be
good at cheering people up by being a good listener. You may be better at
being funny and helping them take their mind off their worries.
Ways to practice socializing
You can practice your social skills in three ways. First, if you feel you’re
socially inexperienced all around, you can simply find ways to spend more
time socializing. This method is unstructured, but you’ll still learn new
things from all the extra hours you’ll rack up, and hone a variety of skills.
You can
socialize more with the people you already know (existing friends,
coworkers, classmates, roommates, family members);
get a job that involves lots of interaction with people (for example,
retail, restaurant server, bartender, call center, sales);
sign up for a volunteer position that involves socializing (for
example, fundraising, talking to seniors, helping out at a festival);
join a club, team, or organization;
attend online-organized meet-ups (for example, from a forum you
use, through sites like Meetup.com);
take advantage of natural opportunities to have brief, friendly
interactions with people who are generally expected to be pleasant
and chat with you, such as store clerks and restaurant servers;
go to a venue where people can show up alone and be social with the
other patrons (for example, a board game café, a pub or pool hall);
interact with people online (for example, chatting with people while
playing a multiplayer game). Of course, this can’t be a complete
substitute for face-to-face practice, but it shouldn’t be dismissed
entirely either; or
if it’s a realistic option, travel and stay in busy, social hostels.
A second method is to practice in a deliberate, structured way, especially
if you want to work on specific skills. For example, if you have trouble
starting conversations, you could attend one online-organized meet-up a
week and talk to at least five new people each time. If you have trouble
with a specific type of interaction, like inviting someone out or turning
down an unreasonable request, you could practice by role-playing the
scenario with a friend or family member. Some organizations and
counseling agencies run social skills training groups that provide
opportunities to practice in a safe, supportive environment.
A third way to practice socially is to take a class to learn a performanceoriented
interpersonal skill like public speaking, acting, or improv or standup
comedy. These more specialized skills don’t fully carry over into day-today
situations. A rehearsed, memorized speech isn’t the same as a
spontaneous, casual conversation. However, they still provide a lot of
benefits. For example, speech classes may teach you how to project your
voice and use confident body language. Performing in a play may help you
deal with your nerves and fear of being on the spot. Improv teaches you to
be more loose, playful, and spontaneous in your conversations. Many
people also find they get a small confidence boost in their daily interactions
from knowing they’re getting the hang of a more intimidating skill like
speaking in public.
You don’t have to spend a lot of time talking to strangers in public to
practice your social skills. Some people think they have to chat with a
bunch of randoms at the mall or grocery store. If you’re specifically trying
to get used to starting and carrying on conversations with people you don’t
know, that’s one thing. If you generally want to rack up some social
experience, talking to strangers is usually too stressful and inefficient. It’s
better to practice with people whom you know and are already somewhat
comfortable with, or strangers you meet in more structured situations like
an art class.
Indirectly improving your social success
Although directly addressing the less-practiced aspects of your social skills
is essential, you can also indirectly help your cause by becoming a more
well-rounded, knowledgeable, interesting person. This works in a “wax on,
wax off” kind of way. Imagine you did nothing to directly practice your
social skills for three months, but spent that time traveling, discovering new
music, and learning to mountain bike. At the end of those three months,
many social situations would likely go more smoothly for you. You’d have
more to talk about and relate to people over, and you’d really notice a
difference if you ended up in a conversation with a traveler, cyclist, or
music fan. The struggles of traveling and learning to mountain bike would
have increased your overall confidence or maybe made you more fun and
adventurous. The experiences you had on vacation may have some cachet
and make people want to chat more with you so they could learn more
about them.
That’s not to say that if you pick up a bunch of new hobbies, you’ll be
able to duck out of the direct practice requirement. Also, some people hear
this advice and they try to learn about and do everything, hoping to get the
maximum social benefit. Of course that’s not feasible.
Knowing how long it will take to catch up in your
social skills
Of course, it’s hard to estimate how much time you’ll need to polish your
social skills because everyone starts from a different place. One to three
years is a reasonable amount of time to expect if you’re behind all around,
as opposed to needing help with a smaller area or two. It generally takes a
few years to get half-decent at many skills.
Reading that may leave you feeling discouraged: “It may take me three
years? Are you kidding me?!” That estimate isn’t meant to bring you down,
but to be straightforward and realistic about the process. In the long run,
knowing what to expect prevents more discouragement than it creates.
Hearing the news doesn’t feel good up front, but when you’re six months in
and have a bad day, you can put it in perspective and not see it as a sign that
you’re hopeless. If this book falsely led you to believe social skills are
quick and easy to obtain, you’d feel worse—and maybe even give up
entirely—if everything didn’t fall into place after a few weeks.
One to three years may seem long, but the process of improving won’t be
a grind the entire time. As with learning anything, it will be roughest at the
beginning and then get more enjoyable and comfortable once you’ve
developed a basic foundation. It’s like learning to play the guitar: In the first
month it hurts your fingers to hold down the strings, and it’s an
accomplishment to play a chord properly, let alone to switch between
several of them quickly and smoothly. At the six-month mark, the situation
is far different. You’re still a clueless beginner in the grand scheme of
things, but you know enough that practicing isn’t a complete struggle, and
is often fun when you get the hang of a new song. It’s the same with
socializing. At first it may be nerve-racking to make polite chitchat with
someone for a few minutes. A year in you may confidently head to a party
with a bunch of friends and know you’ll get in some mingling practice
while you have a good time with everyone.
Not all progress comes slowly either. Some areas are easier to make
improvements in than others. For example, there are some simple, common
mistakes people commit when trying to make friends, and after they know
how to avoid them, their social lives often improve quickly.
You have more time than it seems. Late bloomers often worry that their
best years have passed them by and they’ve missed the window for having a
fulfilling social life. That’s not true at all. Social skills can be learned at any
time in your life. After you’re caught up, you’re caught up. Learning social
skills isn’t like learning languages, where our brains are wired in such a
way that it’s harder to learn new ones after childhood. There’s no door that
closes when you reach 20, 25, 30, or any other arbitrary age. You will have
opportunities to enjoy yourself and socialize throughout your life. If you’re
in your early twenties or younger, you may believe that after college all the
fun dries up and everyone becomes boring and bogged down by
responsibilities. Not true. People never stop socializing and having fun
together.
It can be frustrating to hear you have to wait before you can get what you
want, but try not to succumb to impatience. If you’re impatient, you may
give up on helpful suggestions because they’re not working instantly. You
also might chase one supposed quick fix after another, instead of sticking
with proven approaches that are slower and less glamorous. When you do
get discouraged or impatient, remind yourself that social skills take time to
develop; it’s not realistic to expect to become an expert overnight. Also,
look at where you are now compared to where you began. You’ll be more
likely to keep going when you can show yourself you’re making
improvements.
Expecting your emotions to swing up and down
You can broadly divide the process of putting your social problems behind
you into an initial, more frustrating phase, and a later one where the sailing
is smoother. As you improve your social skills, practicing them becomes
easier and more encouraging, and you have a sense the worst is behind you
—success is just a matter of time if you stay the course.
Your moods can be rocky during that first phase. Whatever happens,
you’ll tend to read too much into what it means for the future. If you have a
good day, you’ll be overly excited and feel like you’ve finally turned a
corner and everything will be okay. When you inevitably have an off day,
you’ll conclude you’re hopeless and you’ll never have better social skills.
With more practice and a few more tastes of success, you’ll calm down.
You’ll also realize that even if you have a few shaky interactions, your
progress is still steadily ticking upward; if you keep at it, you’ll get there
eventually. One way to maintain perspective is to keep a record of your
progress. That way you have an objective reminder that you’re making
positive changes (“I feel like I’m still as shy as I’ve always been, but it says
this month I started more conversations than I ever have, and I’ve hung out
with three new people.”)
Realizing it’s okay to seek professional support
This is a self-help book, but when it’s appropriate, it will point out
situations where it may be helpful to get some extra assistance from a
counselor or support group. Sometimes you’ll face challenges that are too
difficult to deal with on your own. Seeing a professional isn’t a shameful
last resort for “weak,” “broken,” “crazy” people. It’s just a way to get some
knowledgeable experts on your side. If you’re in college, your school may
offer free counseling services. Many communities also have affordable
mental health agencies.
2
Addressing Some Common Challenges and
Concerns about Working on Your Social
Skills
THIS CHAPTER FIRST COVERS common practical challenges to improving your
interpersonal skills; then it goes over some concerns people have about the
process.
Practical challenges
Even when you want to make changes in your social skills, the following
challenges can make it hard to start, and continue, working on them. These
barriers are all surmountable.
“I want to practice my social skills, but I get drained quickly in certain
situations.”
It’s not uncommon for people to quickly become mentally drained when
they’re socializing. They can handle a dinner party conversation for an hour
or two, but after that they feel depleted, like they want to leave. After a few
hours, they’re too tired to properly listen to everyone and craft their
responses. Afterward they usually need some downtime to recover from
their interactions.
Getting drained easily can interfere with your ability to practice, or just
stay out with friends as long as you’d like. From an “acceptable, but
inconvenient, differences” perspective, you may also be annoyed when
people don’t understand you’re wired this way; some less-sensitive people
may give you a hard time when you want to take off from an event early, or
they may take it personally when you look tired around them.
Short-term ways to feel less drained once the feeling has started to set in
Have some caffeine to give yourself a quick burst of energy. This
suggestion especially helps if you’re out late and you’re feeling
sleepy on top of being depleted from socializing.
Have a snack or full meal if you haven’t had any food in a while.
Your energy levels can subtly slip if you’ve gone hours without
eating. However, don’t eat so much that you go into a food coma.
Wait until you get a second wind. Tiredness tends to come in
waves, and your energy will usually rebound if you can gut out the
grogginess for twenty minutes or so.
Take mini-breaks to recover some of your energy. Bathrooms are a
classic hideout. At a bigger function, moving from the hectic indoors
to a more low-key conversation outside may be enough to give you a
breather.
Consciously throw yourself into another gear and try to reengage
with everyone. After you’ve started feeling drained, it’s easy
to give in to those feelings and sit back, zone out, and wait until you
can go home. Hanging back and doing nothing is dull and usually
makes you even more tired and checked out. Instead, try to find a fun
interaction to join, which may perk you up and make you feel more
enthusiastic.
If you know about a draining event ahead of time, take a
strategic nap beforehand so you’ll have more energy.
Becoming less susceptible to feeling drained over the long term
Even taking the above suggestions into account, you can only do so much
to hold back the drained feeling after it’s already started. Here are some
things you can do to reduce your tendency to get socially drained over a
long haul:
Get more proficient at socializing in the situations that tire you
out. Anything is more mentally taxing if you’re unpracticed at it.
Also, you’ll start to feel drained and disengaged more quickly if
you’re bored and not having a good time. As you get more skilled at
handling a situation, it will easier to have fun in it.
Get more comfortable in the situations that tire you. Anxiety is
very physically and mentally draining. When you’re more relaxed in
a situation you won’t waste your energy feeling tense and worried.
Over time push yourself to stay in social situations longer and
longer. You can “exercise” to build up your social endurance. When
you’re out with friends and want to take off, tell yourself you’ll stick
around for another half hour, and then later, an hour or more. After
you’ve decided to stay, actively socialize rather than retreating to
wait out the clock.
Hang around people who are more your style. You’ll be more
prone to feel drained if you’re with people who you don’t have much
in common with and are either too dull or too go-go-go for you.
Be around people more often. Everyone has a baseline level of
social contact they prefer, but it has some wiggle room. If you spend
a lot of time alone, then when you do socialize, it’s more of a shock
to your system, and it won’t be long before you want to be on your
own again. If your life circumstances constantly put you around
classmates, coworkers, family, and roommates, you get used to being
around people constantly. Your need to escape and recharge doesn’t
totally go away, but your tolerance for having company is higher.
“I want to work on my social skills, but I just can’t motivate myself to
get started or stick with practicing for very long.”
To improve your social life you need to be motivated to work on it, and
push through the difficult patches. That motivation is sometimes hard to
find even if you feel you logically should have it. There are a few reasons
this can happen:
Your anxiety is holding you back. It’s only natural you’d want to
avoid the kind of social practice that makes you nervous. At times
you’re well aware that you’d like to make changes but are too scared
of getting rejected, embarrassing yourself, or having to dwell on your
failures. At other times your anxiety will provide you with an excuse
to procrastinate, like “I’ll try to make more friends in the summer,
when I’m not so busy with school.”
If you have a personality where you have a lower need to
socialize and are happy to be alone, you can get caught in a
stagnant middle ground. You wish your social life was better, but
having to spend a lot of time on your own doesn’t bother you that
much, so you never feel enough of the pain or loneliness that lights a
fire under you and compels you to make big changes.
Your goals aren’t your own. You may truly not care about
improving aspects of your social skills at the moment, but have
absorbed messages from society that you should want to address
them. If you’re younger, your family may be pressuring you to
change before you feel ready.
You’re not sure how to begin tackling your problems and are
overwhelmed.
If you struggle with motivation, here are some things you can do:
Learn to handle your anxiety. The book’s next section goes into
detail on this topic.
Accept that you may not be fully ready to change yet. Regardless
of how you think you should feel, your heart may not fully be in it at
the moment. If you don’t have an inner drive to tackle your issues, no
rah-rah speech or quote is going to fix that. At best that’ll make you
feel psyched up for a day or two before you go back to the status quo.
There’s nothing wrong with deciding to wait until a greater sense of
urgency sets in.
Set aside some time to figure out what you really want. Are you
telling yourself you should try to become an outgoing party animal
because that’s what society says is important, when deep down it
doesn’t interest you? Would you feel more enthusiastic about trying
to develop a more low-key social life?
Realize the hardest part is often getting started. After you’re over
that initial hump it will feel rewarding to make progress.
Break your goals down into manageable chunks. Rather than
having a vague objective of “I’m so lonely” or “I’m so bad with
people. I don’t want to be like that anymore,” try to define exactly
what you’d like to change. Would you like to make three friends you
see regularly? Would you like to be able to chat to your coworkers
without feeling tongue-tied and self-conscious?
Focus on the next immediate step. It’s important to keep your longterm
goals in mind so little hiccups don’t discourage you. However,
when it comes to motivation, your overall objective may feel
impossible and overwhelming. You may not know where to start with
“Have a full and rich social life,” but it’s easy enough to tackle “Step
1: Research some places in town where I may be able to meet
people.”
Don’t try to work on every social skill or goal at once. Figure out
the few core things you’ll need to get half-decent at to feel better
about your social situation. Save all the smaller tweaks for later. For
example, if you’re shy and lonely, but okay at making conversation
after you’re past your initial nerves, focus on meeting new people
and being able to feel comfortable enough to chat to them. Don’t
spread yourself thin by also trying to perfect your posture and use of
humor.
Do what you can to practice socializing in ways that are fun and
convenient. There’s no way to avoid feeling uncomfortable at all
times, but as much as possible try to get your practice through types
of interactions you’d enjoy anyway.
Alter your environment so it nudges you toward getting out and
being social. You could decide not to watch TV or play video games
on the weekend, so you’ll feel bored and look for something else to
do. If you have a specific social task you’re putting off, tell yourself
you can’t do certain fun things until you’ve completed it (for
example, “I can’t go on the Internet until I text Karen and ask her if
she wants to hang out this weekend.”).
“I’m too busy to work on my people skills.”
Everyone gets really busy from time to time, and if you have more
important priorities, there’s nothing wrong with putting your social skills
development on the back burner for a while. However, try to be honest with
yourself about whether you’re really too busy or if you’re using that as an
excuse. Don’t hide behind a job or graduate program that has a culture that
glorifies having no life. If you want to try to work around your hectic
schedule, here are some ideas:
Make socializing a priority. Don’t see it as something you’ll get to
if your schedule happens to work out.
Boost your energy level. If being too tired to go out is the problem,
a nap after work or class or a strategic dose of caffeine may be all
you need to get your energy and motivation back.
Manage your time better. Figure out ways to use your time more
efficiently and free up some hours in the day, for example, by
improving your study or assignment-writing skills.
Streamline your social life. Tweak your social life so it’s less timeconsuming
and fits into your schedule. For example, make plans to
see your friends after work, when you’re already downtown.
Spend quality time with people instead of hanging out aimlessly
for hours on end. For example, have a shorter conversation-filled
dinner instead of spending an evening watching TV and barely
talking.
Organize group activities. If you don’t mind that kind of thing, try
to hang out with lots of people at once instead of catching up with
every person individually.
“I don’t think I can get past my social problems without an exhaustive
structured roadmap with hands-on exercises for each subskill.”
Some people like to have every step of a process spelled out before they
feel ready to start. This book offers lots of details that you can apply to your
life as you see fit, but the content still may not be as fine-grained as you’d
like. Every author has to decide what to leave out so the book can stay at a
reasonable length. If you want in-depth clarification on a specific topic, you
can look for it elsewhere, perhaps from a book in the Further Reading
section.
Another possibility is you’re not giving yourself enough credit to figure
out how to improve on your own. To learn any complex skill, you need to
know how to direct your own development at times. Everyone is different,
and your needs aren’t always going to fit a template. You need to know how
to decide what to focus on and how to come up with your own practice
exercises if none are available. As a side effect of being less socially
successful, some people develop a sense of helplessness and passivity
around the issue. They think, “I’m clueless at socializing. I could never
figure out how to get better by myself. The only way I’ll have a chance is if
someone holds my hand every step of the way.” Not so. Figuring out how to
improve is something you have the ability to do.
This is not to pooh-pooh the idea of having a detailed, personalized plan
entirely. Just don’t default to thinking you can’t do anything without one. If
you think having a personalized plan would benefit you, a counselor can
help with that.
“I feel like I’m a lost cause. I’m an especially bad case. I have too many
factors stacked against me to ever get past my issues.”
It’s not uncommon to feel discouraged in this way. However, very few
people are hopeless cases when it comes to their social skills. The ones who
have limits on their potential have real impediments, like congenital
intellectual deficits, lower-functioning autism, or significant mental health
issues like severe schizophrenia. Even then, they can still make some
improvements. If you’re more typically functioning, you’re more than
capable of developing good social skills, even if it takes a while.
When people see themselves as a hopeless case, the biggest barrier that
prevents them from getting over their problems is, ironically, their belief
that they’re a lost cause. If you actively, consistently work on your issues, it
may be tough at times, but you’ll overcome them eventually. However, if
you give up and don’t do anything to address your problems, they are
guaranteed to stay with you. Chapter 5 goes into more detail about how you
can identify and dispute some of the beliefs that may be feeding this sense
of being beyond help.
“I have Asperger’s syndrome/mild autism, which makes it harder for
me to improve my social skills.”
Asperger’s syndrome is an inborn condition on the mild, higher-functioning
end of the autism spectrum. Those who have it find socializing more
difficult in a variety of ways. However, Asperger’s is relatively rare, and
most people who struggle socially don’t have it. Appendix A goes into
detail about the challenges Asperger’s can cause and provides some
approaches for working on your social skills if you have the condition.
Concerns about the idea of working on your people
skills
A fear of having to change too much and sell out to do better socially is a
common concern. This book has already touched on some of these worries,
and here are some more:
“I’m not sure if I want to work on my people skills. I don’t lead a very
social life, and I’m happy with it.”
Odds are you’re reading this book because you’re motivated to change your
social situation. However, maybe you’re feeling more ambivalent. Maybe
someone bought this book for you, and you’re noncommittally flipping
through it.
If you’re content with your current social situation, this book isn’t going
to try to persuade you to change. However, it’s important to make that
decision with full self-awareness and honesty. Issues like anxiety,
discouragement, and past resentments over being picked on or overlooked
can cloud your motivations. You can trick yourself into believing you don’t
want what you think you can’t have.
If you want to spend all of your time at home and not have many friends,
and you’ve arrived at that choice with a clear head, that’s fine. If you think
you want to live a mostly solitary life because a) your anxiety has gotten
out of hand, b) you’re convinced no one would like you if you did try to
make friends, and/or c) you’re bitter about the idea of being social because
you got picked on for being “weird” in high school, that’s a different story.
It’s okay if you’re not operating at 100 percent self-awareness at all times;
no one is. Just check in on yourself occasionally and adjust course if
needed.
“I’m on the fence about working on my social skills. I just don’t enjoy
socializing and don’t see how I’d get any personal benefit from
improving at it.”
If you truly don’t get much out of socializing, then you should live your life
in a way that reflects your personality. However, many people who express
this view are younger. They think they don’t like socializing because they
haven’t experienced how rewarding it can be. Simply put, they don’t know
what they’re missing. They associate “conversation” with all the awkward
or insulting interactions they’ve had, instead of associating it with
interesting, affirming exchanges with good friends who get them.
If your social skills are less developed, you have a lower ability to
“unlock” the fun in many situations. For example, attending a party is going
to feel like a chore if you don’t know how to mingle and participate in
engaging conversations, and are uncomfortable with letting loose or
dancing. Of course, if you don’t get a lot out of parties even after you know
how to navigate them, that’s okay too. It’s also okay if you’re not that keen
on getting good at socializing at parties to begin with. Not everyone has to
like all the same activities or be a social butterfly. However, when you’re
inexperienced or gun-shy, it can cloud your sense of how appealing certain
types of socializing can be. Once your interpersonal skills and confidence
are higher you may find you enjoy some activities more than you used to.
“It’s not socializing itself that I dislike. It’s that I generally think other
people suck.”
Sometimes when a person says they “don’t like people,” it’s just their semifacetious
way of stating, “I’m not super social by nature. I don’t need a ton
of friends. I’m selective about who I hang around. My personality is on the
less conventional side, and I’ve come to realize most people don’t have a lot
to offer me.” That’s fine. Not everybody has to be mainstream and love
everyone.
At other times “I just don’t like people” is said in a much more wounded,
hostile manner. As with believing you don’t like being social, feeling that
you don’t like people may be a reasonable conclusion based on your life so
far. Who wouldn’t dislike people if all they’ve known is cruel classmates,
unsympathetic parents, coworkers they have little in common with, and a
difficult, nitpicky boss?
It’s also easier to form a negative opinion of people when you’re at a
distance. If you spend a lot of time alone, and your only social interactions
are fleeting and superficial, a lot of the information you receive about
humanity is more abstract. You read articles about the latest bar-lowering
hit TV show or trashy celebrity. When you look at life from that detached
viewpoint, it’s easy to be down on everyone else. Improved social skills let
you have the positive firsthand experiences that reinforce how great people
can be.
“I’m the way I am now socially because I was picked on in the past.
Why should I have to change? It’s society in general and the type of
people who bullied me who should change.”
If you were picked on for perfectly acceptable differences like your
interests, then I agree you shouldn’t have to change those things. However,
if being picked on caused you to develop social problems that are having an
undeniable negative effect on your life, you probably do want to change by
getting rid of them.
It’s unjust that you experienced these adversities, but in the end they’re
still issues you need to deal with. You’re only holding yourself back if you
refuse to deal with them out of a sense that it’s not fair. It’s like if you were
walking down the street and a stranger jumped out from behind a corner
and shot you in the leg. Is it your fault that this happened? Not at all. Is it
unfair? Certainly. Is whoever did it a horrible person? Without a doubt. But
at the end of the day, you still have a gunshot wound in your thigh that you
need to attend to. You can’t get everyone in the world to change; you can
only work on yourself.
SECTION
1
Tackling the Main Mental Barriers to
Socializing
In this section
An overview of shyness, social anxiety, insecurity, and
discouragement
Important mind-sets for working on these issues
Four effective approaches for dealing with these issues:
1. Addressing the counterproductive thinking patterns that
sustain them
2. Knowing some hands-on methods for reducing anxiety
3. Gradually facing and reducing your fears
4. Increasing your overall confidence
3
Seeing the Effects of Shyness, Social
Anxiety, Insecurity, and Discouragement
IF YOU’RE LIKE MANY PEOPLE who want to improve their social situation, the
biggest thing holding you back is your own mind. You may be quite
socially capable and charming when you feel comfortable with someone,
but in many situations, your shyness, anxiety, insecurities, and
counterproductive thinking get in the way.
This chapter describes the four main confidence and comfort issues that
interfere with people’s ability to socialize:
1. Shyness
2. Social anxiety
3. Insecurity
4. Pessimism and discouragement
Shyness
Shyness is a multifaceted condition with many variations and nuances, but
in short it’s when you feel inhibited and uncomfortable in certain social
situations because you’re worried about how you’ll come across to
everyone. Just as other social difficulties can range from mild to severe,
shyness also comes in degrees. If you’re slightly shy, you may seem totally
functional and even charming. Even though you may have some inner
worries and insecurities, you can socialize in spite of them. Your shyness
isn’t a huge problem, but even if you’re performing well outwardly, it’s still
draining to be constantly worrying and doubting yourself. If you’re
moderately shy, you’ll be more hesitant and quiet than normal in social
situations, but still be able to get by. If you’re severely shy, you’ll be totally
withdrawn, if you get into many interactions at all. Less mild forms of
shyness overlap with social anxiety, which will be covered in a second.
The richest aspect of shyness is the thinking patterns and beliefs that fuel
it. Shy people think in ways that increase the supposed risks and stakes of
socializing. They see other people as mean and judgmental. They see
themselves as unappealing and less socially capable. They view interactions
as life-or-death tests of their social skills and worthiness as individuals.
Chapter 5 goes into more detail about these unhelpful thinking patterns.
People who suffer from shyness often second-guess the meaning behind
other people’s words. They may be hypersensitive to perceived signs of
rejection or hostility (“She only sort of laughed at my joke. She must hate
me.” “He complimented my hat. He’s probably messing with me
somehow.”) Sometimes they dwell on past social situations, sometimes
years after the fact, and beat themselves up over the things they supposedly
did wrong.
Overall presentation
Regardless of how shy you are, you’re likely to experience some or all of
the following effects:
being hesitant, reserved, and untalkative;
coming across as meek, soft-spoken, and unsure of what you’re
saying;
acting uncomfortable (for example, fidgeting, avoiding eye contact,
crossing your arms over your chest);
having trouble getting your words out or putting sentences together;
stuttering;
coming across as unconfident and self-effacing;
on occasion, being more outgoing and chatty than normal because of
nerves or because that’s how other people expect you to behave;
on occasion, coming across as cold and aloof because you
unintentionally act this way when you’re feeling awkward, or
because you’re purposely trying to manage your discomfort by
sending out “don’t approach me” vibes;
reacting physically: blushing; trembling; muscle tension; sweating;
clammy hands; dry mouth; tight, quiet voice; increased heart rate;
stomach upset; increased need to urinate; feeling amped up and
fidgety.
Circumstances that can bring on shyness
You may feel shy in most social situations or only during particular ones.
Situations in which people commonly feel shy include
meeting new people;
having to work a room and mingle;
interacting with people you find intimidating and high-status (for
example, asking a professor to reconsider a grade she gave you on a
paper);
interacting with people whose opinion you really care about and
whom you want to make a good impression on;
being put on the spot (for example, being handed a microphone out
of the blue and asked to record a video message at a wedding);
being the center of attention or doing something that draws attention
to yourself (for example, being called on in class, wearing flashy
clothes, calling down a hall to get a friend’s attention);
having to perform (for example, giving a speech or telling a story
when everyone at the table is listening intently);
confronting someone or being assertive (for example, telling a friend
you don’t like it when they tease you constantly, telling a coworker
you don’t want to help them move on the weekend);
during interactions where you may upset the other person (for
example, turning down a request, asking someone not to do
something annoying, asking a person to go out of their way for you);
talking on the phone or having to leave a voicemail.
Approaching social situations
Shy people dread many common social settings or interactions because they
aren’t sure how to act or they aren’t sure how they’ll be received by others.
See if any of these responses for handling social situations sound familiar:
completely avoiding social situations or interactions that make you
feel shy (for example, not going to a party, crossing the street to
avoid having to stop and chat with an acquaintance, sending an email
when a phone call would be easier, not following up to hang out with
someone you met the other day);
bailing out of social situations early (for example, making an excuse
to end a conversation after a few minutes, leaving a pub because you
feel so out of your element);
partially avoiding social situations or interactions (for example, being
present in a group conversation but not saying anything);
being less likely to take social risks (for example, not asking
someone to hang out, not approaching a stranger to start a
conversation, holding back a mildly controversial opinion).
Overall consequences
Being shy does more than keep you home at night. It also causes these
overarching problems:
The self-doubt and inhibition inherent in shyness prevent you from
showing your full personality. When you’re in a conversation with
people you feel uncomfortable around, you stand there silently, and
no one sees what you’re capable of. However, if the people were
your long-time friends, you’d be making all kinds of hilarious jokes
and witty observations.
It keeps you from going after what you want.
It simply doesn’t feel good to be so hard on yourself or feel so ill-atease
in certain situations
Your shy behavior may create a poor impression on other people. It’s
not that most people think horribly of shyness; it’s just that if it
comes down to being sure of yourself or being withdrawn, the former
is going to come across better.
Making friends is difficult. You can still make friends when you’re
shy, but the process takes longer and you may have less control. You
have to hope that you’ll spend enough time with the other people for
you to feel comfortable around them or that they’ll give you a chance
and make all the first moves.
Getting a handle on your shyness allows you to reverse the condition.
You’ll be more willing to show your personality and put yourself out there
in social situations. You’ll feel better about who you are. You’ll feel
comfortable instead of being a ball of nerves. On the whole, your
interactions will be more effective. Reducing your shyness also frees you up
to work on your social skills more effectively. You’ll be able to socialize
more often, during which time you can take more chances, push yourself
harder, and make more mistakes you can learn from.
Social anxiety
Social anxiety is when you feel nervous in social situations. It has a lot in
common with shyness; it leads to similar outcomes, like avoidance and
impaired social performance, and is often brought on by fears about how
you’ll come across to people. However, social anxiety and shyness don’t
always go hand in hand. It’s possible to feel shy and inhibited at a party
without feeling physically nervous. It’s also possible, but less likely, to feel
anxious in a social situation without having a ton of worries or insecurities
(for example, even though you know everything will turn out fine, you’re
stressed about meeting your friend’s friends just because it’s a new situation
and you’re generally frazzled from problems at work).
With social anxiety, the nervousness can become its own problem. Mild
anxiety isn’t oodles of fun, but it’s relatively easy to tolerate and push
through. Physically it doesn’t feel that different from excitement. You may
feel a little amped up and jittery or have some minor sweating, blushing, or
butterflies in the stomach. Moderate anxiety is another story. Besides your
fear levels being higher, it can cause unpleasant bodily symptoms like
nausea, trembling, dizziness, hot flashes, heart palpitations, and a need to
use the bathroom. Severe anxiety—that is, a panic attack—is downright
terrifying. You feel incredibly bad physically, you have an intense urge to
escape, and you often think you’re going to die or go crazy.
Acknowledging social fears
If a social situation made you anxious, a completely understandable
reaction would be to become scared of it and want to steer clear of it in the
future. Stronger anxiety can also lead you to develop a second-order fear
that your anxiety is obvious and noticeable, which in turn can cause you to
fear being rejected; you may worry that everyone will be put off by your
looking like a shaky wreck, or that you’ll do something humiliating, like
throw up or freak out in public.
As with shyness, social anxiety can crop up in most social situations or be
specific to a particular one. These more specific fears may be the same as
the ones a shy person has (for example, meeting new people). Socially
anxious people can develop other types of specific fears. First, they may get
nervous and self-conscious in day-to-day situations where they feel people
are watching or evaluating them, such as eating in front of their friends,
writing in view of others, working out at the gym, or, for men, using a
urinal with other guys around. Second, they may develop a fear of
situations where they’re “trapped.” In situations where people feel trapped,
they worry that if they were to become really anxious, they’d draw attention
to themselves and perhaps become a laughing-stock (for example, sitting in
the middle seat of a crowded movie theater, getting a haircut, riding the
subway).
The problem is that this is all self-reinforcing. You develop a fear of fear.
When you’re worried about getting anxious, you’re almost guaranteed to
bring on the very nervousness you want to avoid. It’s one more obstacle to
improving socially. If you go to a party, you’re so preoccupied with
managing your nerves that trying to connect with anyone gets pushed to the
back burner.
Overcoming avoidance
It’s no picnic when your nerves screw up your conversation in the moment,
so you may choose to avoid interactions that may be difficult or unpleasant
for you. However, over the long run, the avoidance that anxiety encourages
is more damaging. Avoiding something that scares you prevents you from
feeling bad in the short term, but often runs counter to your long-term
interests. Anxiety is manageable if you’re afraid of some obscure scenario,
but it’s another story if you feel nervous about day-to-day social situations
that you want to be involved in. A key to handling anxiety is to break the
avoidance habit.
Avoiding something you fear plays into a vicious cycle, which strengthens
your anxiety. Whenever you avoid a situation, the relief you feel reinforces
the behavior and cements the idea that you dodged something truly
dangerous. Avoidance can make you miss out on important parts of life
when you try to prevent yourself from ever feeling uncomfortable. You can
end up rearranging your days into a lonely, sterile rut.
It’s one thing to feel blatantly nervous and cancel on a dinner party or
decide against trying to start a conversation with a classmate. However,
anxiety can be a lot more subtle when it comes to avoiding social situations.
People sometimes have a hard time admitting that they’re not doing
something because it makes them uneasy, and anxiety is great at providing
reasonable-sounding excuses and rationalizations. Anxiety can make you
think you truly aren’t interested in an activity when the situation really just
scares you. You can be about to leave for a get-together when you start
thinking, “You know what? I really should study tonight instead.” Subtle
anxiety can also appear as procrastination. You really want to join that
running club, but you’ve been putting it off for the past six months because
it’s never the perfect time.
Safety behaviors allow you to partially avoid a situation. These behaviors
shelter you from the full brunt of an anxiety-provoking situation. For
example, if you feel off-balance at parties, you may drink a lot to dull your
nerves and have a ready-made excuse for any gaffes you make. Safety
behaviors can also be more understated. If you’re mildly anxious in social
situations, you may be able to have conversations, but only when you stick
to neutral topics, keep the focus on the other person, and don’t reveal any
deeper personal information about yourself. If you have trouble with
specific symptoms like blushing or nausea, you may wear your hair in a
way that covers more of your face or always carry some stomach-soothing
medication around “just in case.”
Social Anxiety Disorder
Shyness is a fairly common, if inconvenient trait. Everyone feels socially
anxious at times. However, if you experience anxiety in social situations
often or intensely enough that it interferes with your life, a professional
could decide a diagnosis of Social Anxiety Disorder / Social Phobia is
appropriate. Here are the criteria for it from the latest edition of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders:
DSM-5 Criteria for Social Anxiety Disorder
A. Marked fear or anxiety about one or more social situations in
which the individual is exposed to possible scrutiny by others.
Examples include social interactions (for example, having a
conversation, meeting unfamiliar people), being observed (for
example, eating or drinking), and performing in front of others
(for example, giving a speech).
B. The individual fears that he or she will act in a way or show
anxiety symptoms that will be negatively evaluated (that is, will
be humiliating and embarrassing; will lead to rejection or offend
others).
C. The social situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety.
D. The social situations are avoided or endured with intense fear or
anxiety.
E. The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual threat posed
by the social situation and to the sociocultural context.
F. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for
6 months or more.
G. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning.
H. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not attributable to the
physiological effects of a substance (for example, a drug of
abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
I. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not better explained by the
symptoms of another mental disorder, such as panic disorder,
body dysmorphic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder.
If another medical condition (for example, Parkinson’s disease, obesity,
disfigurement from burns or injury) is present, the fear, anxiety, or
avoidance is clearly unrelated or is excessive.
To be diagnosed with Social Anxiety Disorder, your nervousness in social
situations has to be at least moderate. There are degrees of severity within
the condition. Someone with a mild version of it may feel quite
uncomfortable in social situations, but is still able to be functional. In
severe cases, people never leave their house, only socialize with family, and
panic if they have to speak to anyone else.
If you suspect you have Social Anxiety Disorder, make an appointment to
see a professional and get their opinion on what steps to take next.
Insecurity
Insecurity boils down to having a low opinion of your own value
(particularly in social situations), assuming other people won’t like you, and
believing your flaws will keep you from meeting your goals. Like anxiety,
insecurity is often a component of shyness, but it can exist on its own. You
could go to a social function and be outgoing and calm, while still having
thoughts like, “I’m too lame to be hanging out with this crowd,” “Everyone
probably thinks I’m annoying,” or “He gave me his number and said we
should hang out, but if I call, he’ll probably think I’m needy.”
Insecurity doesn’t rear its ugly head only before a social interaction. You
may experience some of the following thoughts during a conversation:
“I’m probably screwing up.”
“They think I’m annoying.”
“They’ll only like me if I’m really impressive.”
“They’ll only like me if I hide who I really am.”
“He glanced away for a split second after I made that joke. He
probably thinks I’m corny and trying too hard.”
“She’s talking to me now, but it’s probably just out of politeness.
She’d never want to hang out later.”
When you’re facing the opportunity to pursue a friendship, these thoughts
may run through your mind, causing you to second-guess whether you
should reach out to the other person:
“They probably don’t want to hang out again.”
“If we meet and grab a coffee, they’ll realize how awkward I really
am. No point in bothering.”
Even after you’ve established relationships, you may feel insecure about
your value to the other person:
“My friends probably don’t really like me. They’re still hanging out
with me only out of inertia or pity.”
“She didn’t return my text right away. She hates me.”
Signs of insecurity
Sometimes people who are insecure show no signs of it. Some insecure
people have it together on the outside, and no one would ever guess that
they question their value to themselves and others. But all too often, people
who are insecure subtly convey that feeling to those they’re talking to.
Examples include
coming across as shy, unconfident, and fearful about saying the
wrong thing;
trying too hard to please people and do whatever it takes to get their
approval;
bragging and trying too hard to impress people; acting overly
outgoing and self-assured to compensate for a lack of confidence;
putting others down so you’ll feel better about yourself in
comparison;
acting needy and clingy with friends (for example, contacting them
constantly or always casually mentioning how much they mean to
you and how devastated you’d be if they stopped hanging out with
you);
trying too hard to control your friends’ behavior and force them to be
considerate toward you (for example, “I invited you to my birthday
dinner, and you didn’t let me know you were coming until a week
before it was happening. You should have let me know right away!”);
overreacting to possible signs of rejection, either by giving up
entirely, showing needy behavior (sending a bunch of increasingly
frantic “u there?” texts if they don’t reply to you instantly), or being
too quick to stand up for yourself and set them straight over minor
issues (“You were half an hour late to my party. You have no respect
for me! Don’t let it happen again”).
Discouragement / pessimism
Feeling discouraged or pessimistic is an issue that is different from the three
above, but often goes hand in hand with them. The methods for addressing
it are the same as well. A history of poor social outcomes can lead to
pessimism and discouragement about meeting your goals to improve your
social situation. Feeling discouraged can then cause you to develop a
number of counterproductive mind-sets that can hinder you even further. It
can also lead to self-sabotaging behavior where you don’t try because you
“know” you’ll fail anyway. Here are some typical discouraging thoughts:
“I’m too unlikable. There’s no point in trying anymore.”
“I could go to that party, but it won’t get me anywhere, so I’ll take a
pass.”
“They’ll probably reject me, so I won’t bother talking to them.”
“They seem bored by me. I’ll bow out of the conversation now to
save us both time.”
“He just gave me his number and said we should grab a beer
sometime. It never works out when I follow up with someone, so I
won’t bother.”
“Maybe other awkward people can improve, but my set of issues is
too much to overcome.”
The four related problems of shyness, social anxiety, insecurity, and
discouragement need to be tackled directly. You should do some work on
them before working on conversation or social life issues you want to fix. If
you’re shy and insecure around people, you can indirectly become more
confident by developing your conversation and friend-making skills
(assuming they’re not already fine and your shyness just blocks them from
coming out). One warning though: If you attempt to practice your social
skills but haven’t taken steps to address the counterproductive thinking at
the core of your shyness and anxiety, you may end up worse off. You’ll put
yourself in social situations but still see them as dangerous and high-stakes;
if something goes wrong, you may come to inaccurate, disheartening
conclusions about yourself and your hopes of improving. You don’t have to
get your thinking to a flawless place before you start working on your
people skills, but your thoughts should be at a level where they won’t
completely sabotage you either.
4
Shifting your Mind-Set about Your Social
Discomfort
BEFORE YOU CAN START WORKING on any shyness, anxiety, or lack of
confidence, you need to develop the right mind-set for dealing with these
problems. People often believe two big myths that give their social
discomfort too much power and hinder their ability to deal with it:
1. “There must be a way to totally eradicate my shyness, social
anxiety, and insecurities (and therefore I’ll put improving my social
life on hold until I do that).”
2. “I can’t show any signs of social discomfort to people. It’s
shameful and will ruin the interaction.”
You’ll have to do some work, but you can limit the impact of these
counterproductive mind-sets. This chapter presents some useful attitudes to
adopt regarding social situations. If you keep these points in mind, you’ll be
on your way to feeling more comfortable around people and handling any
uneasiness that pops up along the way.
Know and accept that you’ll never banish all social
discomfort from your life
Although the strategies in the following chapters will help you turn down
the dial on your social discomfort, you’ll never banish those issues
completely. Humans just aren’t wired to be blissfully happy and selfassured
100 percent of the time. Even if you learn and apply every coping
strategy there is, you need to accept that the following things will still
happen:
At times you’ll have worried, insecure, or counterproductive
thoughts, even if you use every technique you know to try to make
them go away.
Sometimes you’ll feel anxious, regardless of how much you try to
control it or logically realize there’s nothing to fret about.
Some situations will always make you a little nervous, even if you’ve
successfully gone through them plenty of times (for example, most
people never get entirely comfortable with public speaking or trying
to start a conversation with someone they’re attracted to).
There will be instances where you’ll make a mistake, get rejected, or
look bad in a social situation, even if you do everything you can to
prevent it.
You’ll feel down on yourself at times, no matter how much you try to
psych yourself up or remind yourself of your strengths.
Even if you seem to have your shyness and insecurities under
control, you may go through a stressful period in your life that makes
them flare up again.
You’ll never be able to predict the future or have full certainty an
upcoming social event will go well.
You may have been born with a tendency to be more anxious and
insecure than average, and it’s something you’ll have to learn to work
around.
Accepting that you may sometimes get uncomfortable in social situations
takes away some of the control your shyness and insecurities have over you.
For example, if you think awkward silences are terrible, you’ll avoid
countless conversations in an attempt to only chat to someone under the
perfect, safe set of conditions. If you make peace with the fact that lulls
happen sometimes, no matter how prepared you are, you’ll be willing to
talk to more people.
Even when you really don’t want a certain outcome, you’ll often feel a
kind of relief when you know for sure it’s going to happen. At least the
uncertainty and “what if?” worrying are gone, and you can focus on how
you’re going to handle it. If you knew with 100 percent certainty you were
going to stumble over your words whenever you met someone new, it
would be inconvenient, but you could shift your energy toward coming up
with strategies to deal with that fact.
Aim to become socially functional, rather than 100
percent assured at all times
After you accept that you’re still going to encounter some social unease
from time to time, your aim should be to become socially functional, where
even if you’re nervous or self-doubting, you can still meet your goals. Don’t
put your social life on hold until you wipe all shyness from your mind,
because that will never happen. A key part of being functional is to realize
you can be shy, nervous, or insecure during a social event and still function
and ultimately enjoy yourself.
Socializing while experiencing a case of the jitters
When people struggle with social anxiety, they sometimes look at their
discomfort in either–or terms when they’re deciding whether to attend a
get-together. They think if they’re not completely confident and relaxed,
then they have to skip it. If nerves strike when they’re with people, they
think the whole outing is ruined.
You can get through most social situations with some self-doubt or jitters.
If your nerves or insecurities are mild, they may not interfere with your
outward performance at all. Even if they trip you up a little, they won’t fully
ruin the interaction. Only the most extreme, sustained anxiety will do that.
A conversation can easily be a success, even if you trembled or had trouble
putting your thoughts together at the beginning of it.
When looking back at an outing, how nervous or unsure you were at the
time becomes even less important. If you get nervous in crowds but go to
see your favorite band anyway, five years from now you’ll be happy you
went and cherish the good memories you have; you’ll hardly regret the
experience because you felt on edge at the start of the show.
Acknowledging that nervousness comes with valued goals
Figure out what is truly important to you in life and commit to going after
it, regardless of your fears or insecurities. This will put your discomfort in
perspective and help you set your priorities. If you’re pursuing something
you truly care about, then any nervousness that comes up along the way
will be worth it. For example, you might decide it’s important to increase
your social circle and try new things. If you get an invitation to go rock
climbing with some coworkers, but the thought of it makes you anxious,
it’ll be easier to get yourself to go because you know it aligns with what
you want.
Accept that it’s okay to show signs of your issues
Shyness and anxiety can have such a powerful hold on you because you’re
afraid of experiencing their symptoms in front of people. You can take a lot
of that influence away if you say to yourself, “You know what? If I look
scared in front of people, then so be it. If I turn red while talking to
someone, it’s not the worst thing ever, if I seem comfortable with myself
otherwise.” If you can start to care less about the consequences of your selfdoubts
or anxiety, you’ll be less likely to feel insecure or anxious in the first
place.
Caring less about your social faux pas is easier said than done. The secret
is to make acting against your worries a higher priority than trying to make
every interaction go perfectly. You can achieve this by employing two
mentalities, either of which may motivate you depending on your
personality:
1. Be pleasant and understanding toward your fears and insecurities. You
see your anxiety as just trying to help, but it’s going too far. If you’re
nervous about meeting your new friends for drinks, tell yourself,
“Anxiety, thanks for your concern, but getting to know new people is a
priority for me, so I’m not going to cancel and stay home.”
2. Be more angry and defiant. You’re tired of letting your shyness and
worries push you around, and you won’t let them run your life any
longer. You may be heading to a meet-up and think, “If I get nervous, I
get nervous. At least I showed up and didn’t let my anxiety rule my
life.” On the walk home, you may think, “I was a little inhibited and
queasy at the start of the night, but I hung in there. My anxiety wanted
me to leave, but I beat it.”
Mention when you’re shy, nervous, or insecure
Part of accepting your shyness or anxiety can include a willingness to tell
people you’re feeling shy or anxious at that moment, or have a problem
with those issues in general. Being able to talk about your problems takes
away the belief that you can’t let anyone find out what you’re going
through. Occasionally someone will respond insensitively, but most people
know what it’s like to feel nervous and will be understanding. If you tell
someone, don’t phrase it as a shameful confession or go into the entire
backstory of your struggles. Just casually let them know you’re a bit
nervous and then move on with the conversation. If you set a tone that your
nerves aren’t that big a deal, everyone else will follow your cues.
Know it’s normal to be shy, insecure, or socially anxious at times
It’s certainly not fun or helpful to feel shy or nervous, but it’s not a sign
you’re weak or mentally defective. These problems are very common. Just
because they may be giving you more trouble than average doesn’t change
that they’re normal human emotions. Go easy on yourself and give yourself
permission to feel that way.
Knowing whether working on your social skills
directly will decrease your shyness
Many people who are shy or socially anxious have perfectly good social
skills. Their fears and insecurities just get in the way of them using those
skills, unless they’re around people they’re comfortable with. Other people
have underdeveloped interpersonal skills in addition to their shyness and
anxiety, and the two problems feed into and amplify each other. If your
social skills are creaky, you may start to feel more socially confident once
you develop them more, or even just learn some strategies on paper and feel
more prepared.
The book’s other two sections on conversation and making friends have
plenty of advice on handling social situations. One warning though: If you
attempt to practice your social skills but haven’t taken steps to address the
counterproductive thinking at the core of your shyness and anxiety, you
may end up worse off. You’ll put yourself in social situations but still see
them as dangerous and high-stakes, and if something goes wrong, you may
come to inaccurate, disheartening conclusions about yourself and your
hopes of improving. You don’t have to get your thinking to a flawless place
before you start practicing your people skills, but your thoughts should be at
a level where they won’t completely sabotage you either.
What if you can’t reduce your shyness or anxiety by
yourself?
If you have mild to moderate shyness or social anxiety, you should be able
to apply the suggestions in the next four chapters using a self-help
approach. Sometimes your anxiety will be more severe and too much to
handle on your own. If that’s the case, consider seeing a therapist or joining
an anxiety support group. You’ll still go through the same kinds of
treatment approaches the following chapters cover, but a professional or
others with similar issues can support you through the rough patches and
customize everything to your needs. Also, go to a doctor to rule out whether
your anxiety has a physical cause, like an issue with your thyroid gland.
Medication may also be an option to look into. Speak to a physician or a
psychiatrist about that possibility and to get the most up-to-date information
about your options. Medication dampens the physical symptoms of anxiety,
but doesn’t affect its underlying psychological causes. It needs to be used in
conjunction with psychological treatment approaches that address those
issues. Medication can reduce your symptoms enough that you can
implement a treatment plan you’d otherwise be too nervous to progress
through.
Although many people take medication on a short-term basis, a smaller
number feel it improves their quality of life enough to justify staying on it
long-term. They realize that they were born with an overly high anxiety
level, and medication brings it down to a level where they can function
better.
Some people are justifiably wary about taking any kind of drug, and it’s
not a decision to be made lightly. Medication can cause side effects, and it
can take people some time and experimentation before they find a drug and
dosage that works for them. In more severe cases, it can make the
difference though, so at least give it some thought if a professional makes
that recommendation.
5
Handling Counterproductive Thinking about
Socializing
SHYNESS, SOCIAL ANXIETY, INSECURITIES, AND DISCOURAGEMENT about your
chances of improving are all sustained in part by thoughts and beliefs that
are counterproductive—that is, thoughts that lead you away from good
outcomes. They create unpleasant feelings like nervousness and self-doubt,
and cause you to behave in ways that go against your goals, such as
avoiding get-togethers or giving up on trying to be friends with people.
They can pop up in the present moment or when you’re looking back on the
past or toward the future. If you can rein in your negative thoughts about
socializing, you’ll be more content and confident and have an easier time
going after what you want.
This chapter explains the two broad ways your thinking can stifle you.
Then it covers two approaches for dealing with your counterproductive
thoughts. First, it gives you a framework for identifying and disputing these
types of thoughts and replacing them with more-balanced alternatives. It
then explains an equally effective alternative approach—using mindfulness
principles to acknowledge and accept your counterproductive thoughts
without getting sucked into them.
Counterproductive thinking pattern 1: Cognitive
distortions
When thinking about social interactions, you may have thoughts that
psychologists call cognitive distortions. These thought patterns become
misleading and irrational in ways that sustain your problems. It’s possible to
have cognitive distortions about all kinds of things, like your ability to grow
tomatoes, but the examples below naturally focus on social situations.
Emotional reasoning
Emotional reasoning is when you think that because your emotions are
telling you something is a certain way, it truly is that way. For example,
thinking that because you feel anxious, something must be happening that is
worth feeling anxious about, when in fact maybe you’re just on edge
because you drank too much coffee. In social situations, it often creates the
reasoning of “I’m nervous about doing X, therefore X must be scary,
difficult, and complicated.”
Jumping to conclusions
When you jump to conclusions, you quickly assume something negative,
even though your belief has little or no basis in reality. There are two
variations: mind reading and fortune-telling.
Mind reading is when you believe someone thinks a certain way
without any solid evidence to support it (for example, “I just know
everyone on my dodgeball team hates me” or “When she said ‘hi’ she
was doing it sarcastically to subtly mock me”).
Fortune-telling is when you assume an event will turn out a certain
way (for example, when you “know” you’re not going to have fun at
the bar later that night because some jerk is going to bother you).
All-or-nothing thinking / Black-and-white thinking
When you see things in simplistic, absolute terms, you’re using all-ornothing
or black-and-white thinking. This may involve extreme
comparisons like perfect vs. useless or words like “never” or “always.” It
often comes up when you’re thinking about your social goals or evaluating
how you’re currently doing. For example, “I don’t think I’ll be able to
become incredibly charismatic, so there’s no point in trying to work on my
social skills at all,” or “Not every person in my class loves me, so that
means I’m a complete reject.”
Overgeneralization
Overgeneralization involves taking a few isolated incidents and making
sweeping generalizations about yourself, other people, or your life. For
example, “My one coworker didn’t invite me out. No one at my job wants
to be friends,” or “I didn’t find those two people that interesting to talk to. I
have nothing in common with anybody.”
Filtering
You’re filtering when you apply a dark-tinted mental lens to your
perceptions so you dwell on the bad aspects of something, while ignoring
the good. This can involve “seeing what you want to see.” Because life
offers up a variety of experiences, no matter what conclusion you want to
reach, you can usually cherry-pick enough “evidence” to support it. For
example, you may be feeling discouraged about getting over your shyness
and remember the times you felt self-conscious and inhibited, but “forget”
all the instances where you weren’t. Or you may believe that other men /
women are macho jerks / catty gossips. You overlook all the people who
don’t fit that stereotype but can’t let it go if you spot someone acting like an
obnoxious bro / backstabbing Queen Bee.
Magnification and minimization
When you overstate how something really is, once again with iffy evidence
to back up your thinking, you magnify the situation; similarly, if you
understate a situation with insufficient evidence, you minimize it. For
example, you could magnify the supposed importance of the first week of
college by believing that if you don’t make friends during that time, your
social life for the next four years will be ruined. You could minimize the
usefulness of a personal talent by telling yourself, “Sure, I’m good at
singing, but there’s no way that could help me meet people. How much
could joining a choir or band really do?”
Catastrophizing
When your mind leaps to the worst possible outcome, you’re
catastrophizing. It can also mean to see a situation as totally hopeless or
unbearable, when it’s really just uncomfortable. This cognitive distortion
unsurprisingly tends to increase anxiety. Some examples:
“I have no plans this weekend. I can’t take it. I just know I’m going
to live a life of complete social isolation.”
“If I seem shy at this lunch, everyone’s going to think I’m a weirdo
and kick me out of the group.”
“I’m feeling too nervous right now. I can’t do this, I can’t do this. I
need to leave.”
“Should” statements
This cognitive distortion involves constraining yourself with unrealistic
expectations about how things “should” be (for example, “People should
invite their friends to hang out at least once a week, otherwise it’s a sign
they hate them”; “I should always have brilliant things to say in
conversations”; “I should never get anxious in social situations”).
Labeling
Labeling occurs when you slap simplistic labels on things in order to
explain them, rather than looking at the unique facets of the situation. You’d
be labeling if you explained away a strained conversation by saying it was
because you’re a geek and the other person was a jock, or if you told
yourself, “I’m an electrical engineering student. It’s a given that I’m
awkward around people.”
Personalization
Personalization involves thinking you directly caused something to happen,
or that something relates to you, when other forces may have been at work.
For example, you might think your friends want to leave your place early
because you’re so boring, when they’re really just tired.
Disqualifying the positive
Disqualifying the positive is when you dismiss positive events for no real
reason, probably while being all too eager to accept the negative ones (for
example, “I had a really nice conversation with Amy at that party, but it
doesn’t count. She’s friendly to everyone. I still suck at talking to people”).
Attributional style
Disqualifying the positive ties into a related psychological concept called
attributional style, or explanatory style, which is the way people tend to
explain events to themselves. People who are socially insecure tend to
dismiss positive experiences as being one-off flukes, while seeing negative
interactions as being caused by their enduring flaws. If they have a good
conversation, they’ll write it off as the other person being in a cheerful
mood or talking to them out of pity. If they have a stilted exchange, they’ll
blame it on how boring or awkward they are. Most people are the opposite.
They’re slightly benignly deluded in a way that helps them function better.
If an interaction goes well, they give themselves the credit, but if it doesn’t,
they look for outside explanations, like that the other person was distracted
and in a hurry.
Counterproductive thinking pattern 2: Unhelpful
beliefs
A lot of counterproductive beliefs arise from cognitive distortions. Odds
are, as you read the preceding section, you recognized a few cognitive
distortions you’ve had yourself. Your thinking can also interfere with your
social success when you hold inaccurate beliefs that are related to
socializing. A few of these beliefs are straight-up false. Most have a kernel
of truth to them, but that element has been blown out of proportion.
Unhelpful beliefs can be about several categories. You’ll notice some of
them contain cognitive distortions like mind reading or fortune-telling as
well:
Beliefs about yourself
“Being shy or socially inexperienced is a very negative trait.”
“I’m flawed and unappealing at my core.”
“People won’t like me because I’m too X.”
Beliefs about the risks and stakes of socializing
“My worth as a person depends on how well I perform socially.”
“My social performance has to be 100 percent at all times, or I won’t
be successful.”
“Every interaction is a test of my social skills and likability.”
“It would be terrible if people thought of me as shy or awkward.”
“Every social mistake I make will have horrible immediate
consequences.”
“If I screw up, people will remember it, hold it against me for a long
time, and tell everyone they know, and it will ruin my social life.”
“Rejection is terrible and intolerable.”
Beliefs that give you responsibility for things you can’t control
“I must make everyone like me.”
“I’m 100 percent responsible for how well an interaction goes.”
“I’m 100 percent responsible for other people’s reactions to me.”
Beliefs about other people
“Everyone is really choosy about what they look for in others.”
“Everyone else has their act together socially.”
“Other people are constantly evaluating how I’m coming across
socially.”
“This certain type of person is mean and especially likely to reject
me.”
“Certain people have the authority to judge my value as a person. If
they don’t like me, then I’m a loser.”
“People often mock others by pretending to compliment or be
friendly to them.”
Beliefs about improving your social situation
“Something about my area makes meeting my social goals too hard.”
(For example, “The people in my city are too unfriendly” or “There’s
nowhere good to meet anyone in my town.”)
“Something about me makes it too hard to reach my social goals.”
(for example, “I’m too old to make friends.” or “I have bad skin. No
one will want to hang out with me.”)
“It’s inappropriate or ineffective to do certain things to try to reach
my social goals.” (For example, “I can’t just start conversations with
people I don’t know. Who does that? Everyone will think I’m a
creep.”)
These unhelpful beliefs may only somewhat interfere with your social
success. For example, a belief that other people are putting your social
skills under a microscope may make you somewhat more nervous around
others, but not enough that it prevents you from meeting new friends.
Beliefs can limit you when you believe them too strongly and refuse to
accept the possibility that you’re wrong. For example, you could believe
that you’ll never make friends in your new city because the locals are too
cold and aloof; when anyone tries to say differently, you get angry. These
limiting beliefs can be stubborn because the filtering cognitive distortion
can kick in and cause you to focus only on things that confirm your existing
views.
Now that you have an understanding of how your thinking can get in the
way, let’s look at the first method for dealing with it.
Identifying, questioning, and replacing your
counterproductive thinking
Because counterproductive thoughts are distorted or inaccurate, you can
overcome many of them by logically picking them apart and replacing them
with a more realistic alternative. Here are the steps to doing this:
Step 1: Identify your counterproductive thoughts and
beliefs
You can informally do this step and the next one in your head, but they’re
more effective if you make a proper written exercise out of them. It’s an
ongoing process. Don’t expect to spot and debunk all of your negative
thoughts in one twenty-minute brainstorming session.
Areas of counterproductive thinking to delve into
1. Think of what your counterproductive beliefs are. If you’re like
most shy or less-confident people, you’re all too familiar with the
messages that scroll through your brain all day and won’t have
trouble getting a bunch of them down on paper.
2. Follow your negative emotions (for example, anxiety,
discouragement, resentment) and see where they lead you. For
example, you might start thinking about some acquaintances, feel a
bit sad, and then identify some worries about them not wanting to
become closer friends with you.
3. Pick a specific social situation you struggle with and then examine
your thoughts around it (for example, speaking up in class).
4. Look back on a social interaction you recently had. Say you tried
chatting with some coworkers during your lunch break. How do
you feel it went? What discouraging or self-critical thoughts are
you having about it?
Step 2: Critically examine your counterproductive
thoughts and beliefs
Do this step when you have some time to yourself and you’re in a fairly
neutral, logical mood. It is possible to analyze your thoughts when you’re in
the middle of a social situation or in the grip of a strong emotion, but it’s a
lot more difficult to stay objective.
To begin, you want to shift your perspective. When dissecting each
thought, imagine it’s something a friend told you they were feeling about
themselves or a statement your worst enemy made to you. You’ll often
uncritically accept ideas from your own mind that you would question
instantly if they came from an outside source.
You could also try “externalizing” your issues. Instead of seeing your
anxiety or insecurity as a core part of you, view it as an outside entity that
has taken up residence in your mind and is trying to sabotage it (for
example, picture it as a cartoony demon).
Next, ask several questions of each thought and see how well it holds up:
What is the overall tone of the thought? Sometimes you’ll have
thoughts that are technically accurate and free of distortions, but
you’re still being way too harsh and unsympathetic toward yourself.
Is there a cognitive distortion, self-effacing attribution, or unhelpful
belief in the thought?
Do you have any evidence that the thought is accurate and true?
Don’t just think about it for a second and come to a knee-jerk
conclusion. Write out all the objective arguments for each side, like
you were arguing a case in court. Say you believe no one likes you.
What real-world encounters are you basing that on? Are you giving
too much weight to one negative memory? What about
counterexamples of people who enjoy having you around?
If you feel you do have evidence that the thought is true, is it
accurate, or is it the product of counterproductive thinking as well? If
you think, “No one likes me,” and for evidence you recall that last
week one acquaintance didn’t respond to your text right away, that’s
overgeneralizing or jumping to conclusions. If you say, “I just know
everyone hates me. I just feel it every time I reach out to someone,”
that’s mind reading and emotional reasoning.
If you have a simplistic black-and-white thought about yourself, like
“I’m boring,” can you break it down more? You’re not either 100
percent dull or 100 percent interesting. What percent interesting
would you say you are? What are the individual elements of being
interesting? Being funny? Having unique experiences and stories to
share? Having insightful opinions? If you made each of those a scale
from 0 to 10, where would you come out on them?
What if a belief or observation turns out to be true?
If you’re really shy and insecure, you should lean toward assuming your
thoughts on socializing are at least somewhat skewed. However, sometimes
you’ll put a thought or belief through the questioning process, and it will be
accurate. For example, you can make a solid argument that two of your
acquaintances truly don’t want to be closer friends. When that’s the case,
don’t overgeneralize beyond it (two people not wanting to be friends with
you doesn’t mean you’re utterly flawed and hopeless). Even if the
conclusion you came to stings, try to get any useful feedback you can from
it, such as realizing you were coming on a bit too strong and scared them
off.
Finally, ask yourself what the consequences are of holding a particular
thought or belief. Even if it’s technically true, it may not lead to the best
outcomes. For example, you could make a case that humans are inherently
selfish; however, socializing under this assumption may lead you to be too
guarded, distrusting, and cynical. It’s more adaptive to act as if people
generally have good intentions.
Step 3: Come up with more realistic, balanced
alternatives for your counterproductive thoughts
The key words here are realistic and balanced. The idea is not to skip
around being blindly “positive.” An unrealistic counterproductive thought
might be, “Everyone at this party will hate me. I’ll never make any friends
in this city!” An equally unrealistic overly positive thought may be, “I’m an
amazing person! Everyone there will love me instantly!” A balanced
thought is, “Some people will probably like me, and others won’t. The ones
who aren’t into me probably won’t be mean, just kind of indifferent. I can
handle that and will concentrate on the ones who seem friendly.”
As mentioned, tone is just as important as content. Even if what you’re
telling yourself is technically balanced and true, you shouldn’t need talk to
yourself as if you’re an incompetent piece of crap. You can work to
improve yourself while being compassionate and understanding of your
struggles at the same time.
There will be several examples after the final step is explained.
Step 4: Continually question your counterproductive
thoughts
If you have interpersonal issues, you have probably been thinking about
yourself and your social skills in a negative light for many years. That’s not
a pattern you’re going to undo in a week. You need to continue discovering
and challenging your counterproductive thoughts and beliefs. Written
exercises will always be useful, but after you’ve gotten the hang of
analyzing your thoughts, practice noticing and quickly analyzing them as
they appear. For example, you may be at a pub and suddenly stop having
fun and get the urge to go home early. Why? You may realize you had a
thought like, “I don’t belong here. My friends don’t really want me around.
They just invited me because they feel sorry for me.” If you can nip that
mind-reading thinking in the bud, your night can go on.
You don’t necessarily have to sit down for an hour every day to do a fullon
written analysis of your thoughts, but you should continually be on the
alert for the ways your own mind is trying to hinder you. With time, your
thinking really can shift. You’ll never completely be free of
counterproductive thoughts—no one is—but your outlook can become a lot
more self-supportive and optimistic. You’ll also become more familiar with
the directions your mind tends to go and can learn to cut off many of your
counterproductive thoughts before they pick up steam.
Common cognitively distorted thoughts with more
realistic alternatives
“I just know everyone at my job hates me.” (Mind reading)
Alternative: Unless you have strong, clear-cut evidence, the odds this is the
case are really low. You’re probably projecting your insecurities onto
ambiguous things like one person not giving you a big enough nod when
you passed in the hallway. Maybe one or two coworkers aren’t fans of
yours, but most are probably pretty neutral about you.
“If I go out to the bar with my friends, I know all kinds of annoying
things will go wrong with the night.” (Fortune-telling)
Alternative: Social events hardly ever turn out exactly as we predict or
anticipate, good or bad. The more social experience you get, the more this
point will be driven home.
“I can’t see myself becoming extremely charismatic so I don’t see the
point in working on my people skills.” (Black-and-white thinking)
Alternative: Even tweaking your social skills a little can make a big
difference in the quality of your life. You only need average people skills to
enjoy most of what the social world has to offer.
“Not everyone in my class likes me. That means I’m a complete reject.”
(Black-and-white thinking)
Alternative: Your worth as a person doesn’t hinge on having every last
person like you. No one is universally liked. You can get by in life by
having a smaller group of friends with most other people being indifferent
to you.
“My one coworker didn’t invite me to his barbeque. No one wants to be
friends with me.” (Overgeneralization)
Alternative: How one or a few people act doesn’t say anything about the
rest of the world. There are plenty more chances to make friends.
“The first week of college makes or breaks you socially. If you don’t
make a ton of friends, your social life for the next four years is ruined.”
(Magnification)
Alternative: There are lots of chances to make friends at the start of
college, but if you don’t, you’ll have countless other chances to meet
people.
“Yeah, I’m a really good singer. But I don’t see how that will help me
make friends.” (Minimization)
Alternative: As with most skills, singing isn’t universally useful for
meeting people, but it still opens some doors, such as being able to join a
band or choir, and those opportunities shouldn’t be discounted. All else
being equal, singing (and similar skills) is a helpful talent to have in your
pocket.
“I have no plans for the weekend. I’m never going to have a social life!”
(Catastrophizing)
Alternative: As discouraging or boring as it may be, one slow weekend
doesn’t mean your social life is doomed for all the decades to follow,
especially if you’re actively working to make friends.
“I feel too nervous. I can’t take it! I can’t take it! I have to leave!”
(Catastrophizing)
Alternative: Anxiety can be unpleasant, but its worst moments are shortlived
spikes. For the most part, you can handle those episodes, even if it’s
not the most comfortable experience.
“People should invite their friends out at least once a week.” (“Should”
statements)
Alternative: There’s no one way people have to act around their friends.
Everyone has his or her own social style. If someone invites you out less
frequently, it doesn’t necessarily mean anything bad.
“I should never get anxious.” (“Should” statements)
Alternative: This is unrealistic. Anxiety is a core human emotion that
everyone feels from time to time, even the most confident individuals.
“I’m an electrical engineering student. It’s a given that I’m awkward
with people.” (Labeling)
Alternative: Electrical engineering is a field of study. It doesn’t
automatically doom anyone who’s interested in it to have certain social
limitations. Even if you are an engineering student and you feel you’re not
good with people, you can work to change that.
“Everyone left early because I’m so boring to be around.”
(Personalization)
Alternative: They could have needed to leave for any number of reasons
that had nothing to do with you; for example, maybe they were tired or had
to be up early the next morning.
“Sure, I had a good conversation with Amy, but she’s nice to everyone,
so it doesn’t count.” (Disqualifying the positive)
Alternative: You need to give yourself credit for your successes, even if
some of them come more easily than others. There’s still a lot you have to
do on your end to make good conversation with someone, even if they are
nicer than average.
Common unhelpful beliefs with more realistic
alternatives
“Being shy and socially inexperienced is one of the worst things
someone can be.”
Alternative: Those issues are common. Plenty of people have good friends
and satisfying social lives despite not being socially perfect. As far as flaws
go, it’s hardly comparable to, say, being a con artist who swindles money
from unwary pensioners.
“I couldn’t withstand rejection, disapproval, or an awkward
interaction.”
Alternative: Rejection can hurt, but you can bounce back from it, even if it
makes you feel bummed out for a few days. No one ever becomes totally
immune to it, but it’s possible to develop more productive attitudes toward
rejection and become more tolerant to it:
When it happens, rejection often doesn’t hurt as much as you expect
it to.
Just because one person rejects you doesn’t mean no one else is
interested in you.
Rejection isn’t a sign that you’re universally flawed; it just means
you weren’t a good match for that particular person or group.
Rejection sometimes isn’t about you at all. Someone may reject you
because they were in a bad mood that day.
Making new friends is partially a numbers game, and some amount
of rejection is inevitable.
Rejection helps screen out people who are incompatible with you and
frees you to put your energy elsewhere.
Sometimes you’ll be rejected for mistakes you make, but at least
you’ll get feedback on how you can do better next time.
People often respect someone who has the guts to go for what they
want, even if they’re rejected.
These mentalities tend to grow as you have more success and build up the
real-world experiences that prove that even if some people turn you down,
you can go on to have a good social life. Also, when you’re purposely
trying to get used to rejection, you’ll often react to it differently than when
you were unconsciously trying to avoid it. You’ll tend to treat it as a form of
training, like a martial artist trying to toughen his hands, rather than
something scary to avoid at all costs.
“I must make everyone like me.”
Alternative: It’s impossible to make everyone like you. There are too many
conflicting types of people in the world for that to happen. You wouldn’t
want everyone to like you either. If you’re progressively minded, would you
want to be friends with a bigot? Furthermore, the more alternative your
lifestyle and values are, the fewer people who will be receptive to you.
Even if you’re a pleasant, charming person, some closed-minded types
won’t give you a chance based on a surface impression. There’s more to life
than getting approval from the maximum percentage of the population.
“It would be terrible if people thought of me as shy, socially awkward,
or nervous.”
Alternative: Most people are pretty forgiving of shyness and anxiety in
others. They’ve felt nervous in situations themselves and are understanding.
Sometimes shyness or social fumbling is seen as endearing and disarming.
A few jerks may give you a hard time for it, but they’re relatively rare,
especially after high school.
“Every social mistake will have horrible consequences.”
Alternative: People make little social errors all the time. Most of them are
quickly forgotten and have no lasting effects. Again, aside from the
occasional jerk, most people are willing to cut you some slack if you make
some gaffes but are otherwise a good person.
“If I do something wrong, people will care about it and think badly of
me for a long time.”
Alternative: Most people are too busy worrying about themselves to give
much thought to whether you said the wrong thing or seemed nervous at the
start of the conversation. Even if the odd person does think badly of you,
you can handle it.
“Every interaction is a test of my social skills and likability.”
Alternative: You’re not a failure for all time just because you have one
shaky social interaction. Everyone has them. There’s no social scoreboard
in the sky.
“I’m 100 percent responsible for how well an interaction goes.”
Alternative: The other people in an interaction have to pull their weight as
well. If a conversation goes badly, it could be just as much a reflection of
their social abilities as yours. It’s a misconception that if someone’s people
skills are good enough, they can make every interaction go smoothly.
“I’m 100 percent responsible for other people’s reactions.”
Alternative: People’s reactions are often as much about them as about you.
If someone reacts badly to you, it may because they’re stressed for any
number of possible reasons.
“My social performance has to be at 100 percent at all times.”
Alternative: Many people do just fine in social situations even if they’re
not completely “on.” It’s possible to socialize effectively if you’re feeling a
bit distracted, grumpy, or insecure.
“Everyone has super high standards for what they expect in others. I
have to come across as really impressive.”
Alternative: Some people are choosy, but what most people look for in a
friend is someone who they get along with, who they have some things in
common with, and who they feel comfortable around. They’re not looking
for someone who’s perfect in every way.
“Everyone else totally has their act together socially.”
Alternative: Everyone has weak areas and insecurities. Everyone has
nervous moments. Most people are socially average. Only a handful are
highly charming and confident, and even they feel unsure of themselves at
times.
“He just said he liked my shirt. He’s making fun of me.”
Alternative: The vast majority of the time, if a person says something
positive to you, they mean it at face value. They’re not subtly disrespecting
you or setting up a trap. The best way to handle a compliment is with a
simple, cheerful “Thanks.”
“The people in this city have a reputation for being unfriendly to nonlocals,
and I’m overweight and have a stutter. It’s impossible for me to
make friends here.”
Alternative: All else being equal, it will be harder for you to make friends,
but that’s not even close to meaning it’s impossible. Most people have a few
traits or circumstances that get in the way of their social lives, but they
manage.
“It’s inappropriate to chat with strangers. Who does that? Everyone
will think I’m a creep.”
Alternative: Although not everyone talks to strangers, it’s not unusual to
do so, and it often goes well. Sometimes you won’t get a warm reaction,
even when you approach someone in a polite way, but it doesn’t mean the
act itself is wrong.
Using mindfulness-based techniques to deal with
unhelpful thoughts and emotions
The preceding part of the chapter explained how to reframe unhelpful
thoughts by logically debunking them. The ideas in this part offer another
approach: to deal with unwanted thoughts and emotions by acknowledging
their presence, but not getting sucked in by them. The concepts may seem
to contradict the suggestions above, but in practice the two approaches are
complementary. Some of your unpleasant thoughts and feelings will
respond better to a logical reasoning approach, while others are better
managed by being mindful, which is covered in the following pages.
Being mindful of unwanted thoughts and feelings
Mindfulness involves focusing your attention on the present moment and
experiencing your thoughts, emotions, and bodily sensations without
judgment. Rather than seeing anxiety, nervousness, or shyness as horrible
things you must fight off at all costs, you can accept that they will
sometimes appear, but you don’t have to get swallowed up by them.
Instead, you can learn to experience them in a more detached way.
Our minds are thought generators. Some of our thoughts are useful and
valid, but others are mental noise. The anxious and unconfident parts of the
mind in particular tend to send out a steady stream of worried or insecure
chatter. These thoughts aren’t bad or evil. They’re just a by-product of how
our brains work. You can learn to simply observe these thoughts and choose
not to take them at face value or act on them. You don’t need to debate or
break them down. That would give them too much credit and power.
Instead, you can briefly note them in a distant, nonjudgmental way and then
let them pass.
Try this: Think to yourself, “There’s a hungry dragon nearby.” When you
did this, you probably thought, “‘There’s a hungry dragon nearby’.… Uh…
Okay?” You had the thought, but you didn’t automatically go, “Oh no! A
dragon! I’ve got to hide!” However, when you have thoughts like, “No one
likes me” or “I won’t be able to handle meeting my roommate’s friends
tomorrow,” you’re much more likely to treat them as true and get pulled
into worrying mode or see them as a type of thinking that must be battled
and purged. You’ll never stop having undesirable thoughts, but with
practice you can get better at not reacting to them.
The same approach can be applied to emotions. If a negative feeling such
as nervousness or sadness comes on, the idea is not to fight it and
inadvertently fan the flames. Your moods come and go, and if you let them
run their course instead of overreacting, you’ll usually feel different before
long. For example, if you start to feel anxious, “be” with your anxiety,
observe it with a detached curiosity, and let it do its thing; it will pass soon
enough. It may not feel pleasant, but it can’t truly hurt you. On the other
hand, if you get freaked out by your nervous symptoms, you’ll make them
worse. A common analogy is that it’s like being out in the ocean as a big
wave approaches you. If you stay calm and tread water, it will pass under
you. If you struggle and try to swim away from the wave, you’ll stay with it
until it slams into shore.
Practicing mindful meditation
You can cultivate your ability to experience your thoughts and feelings
without overreacting to them by practicing mindful meditation. Unlike
some other types of meditation, the idea isn’t to achieve a state of
relaxation, stop all thinking entirely, or come to some Zen insight about the
universe that sweeps all of your problems away. The goal is to sit quietly
and feel any number of feelings or think any number of thoughts, but not
judge, label, or overreact to any of it. As with any skill, you can get better at
it through consistent practice.
Here’s a quick overview of how to mindfully meditate. Some books in the
Further Reading section go into more detail if it’s something that piques
your interest.
Caution: If you have a type of anxiety that tends to get triggered by
focusing on your physical symptoms, this exercise may not be for you, at
least without a counselor who’s familiar with the practice to guide you
through it at first.
Set aside roughly fifteen minutes. The exact length of time it isn’t critical.
Sit or lie in a comfortable position. Feel free to use a chair or couch. Choose
whether to open or close your eyes. Go with whichever you find easiest.
Focus on your breathing. You don’t need to breathe in any special way; just
pay attention to it.
Sit or lie quietly. All kinds of thoughts will pass through your mind, from
reminding yourself of errands you need to run to feeling insecure about
yourself to thinking, “I’m bored. This isn’t working.” It doesn’t matter what
the thoughts are. Try to acknowledge them in a detached way and then set
them aside and return your focus to your breathing. Allow yourself to feel a
variety of sensations, like noticing your face is itchy, wanting to move your
leg, or feeling pangs of nervousness. Whatever the sensation is, don’t try to
make it go away. Just sit with it and observe it with a gentle curiosity.
Watch how it changes on its own and likely dissipates. If your mind
wanders for minutes at a time, that’s fine. The purpose of this type of
meditation is to realize that your thinking can go in any number of
directions, that it’s all okay, and that you don’t need to react to all of it.
When you’re done meditating, sit or lie still for another minute or two,
then simply get up and resume your day.
Try to mindfully meditate each day. If you’d like, gradually try to increase
the length of your sessions, up to about an hour. However, don’t feel you
must. Short meditations are still beneficial.
As you become more proficient at being mindful while meditating, you’ll
find the skill will carry over into your day-to-day life. You’ll have an easier
time letting your thoughts and negative emotions happen and pass away
without overreacting to them.
6
Hands-On Strategies for Taking the Edge Off
Anxiety
THE LAST CHAPTER COVERED some ways you can reduce your anxiety by
challenging it or rolling with it. This one gives you some more hands-on
strategies to reduce its impact. It covers broad lifestyle changes you can
make to turn down the volume on your negative emotions. You will also
find many hands-on tips for reducing anxiety in the moment during various
situations—when you’re on your own, when you’re anticipating a social
interaction, and when you’re in the middle of one.
Everything in this chapter should be a supplement to changing your
overall relationship to your anxiety. As Chapter 4 explained, the best way to
approach your anxiety is to make peace with the fact that it may appear and
not rearrange your life to avoid it. However, from a practical standpoint,
anxiety is still an unpleasant feeling, so it’s okay to try to lower its volume.
The strategies presented here won’t be as useful if you let your anxiety have
power over you by seeing it as something terrible you must prevent at all
costs.
Make positive lifestyle changes to boost your mood
Living a healthy lifestyle reduces the overall amount of stress and negative
emotions you experience. If your day-to-day anxiety is mild, a few lifestyle
changes may be all you need to reduce it to manageable levels. Even if the
changes don’t fully alter your mood, they can make a significant difference.
Other emotional issues like depression also respond well to positive
lifestyle adjustments.
The more of the following approaches you apply, the better. However,
most people find that certain suggestions are more attractive than others, so
use the ones that stand out the most to you. It’s beyond the scope of this
book to go into detail about each of them, but plenty of other sources cover
that information. Here they are:
Deal with the legitimate problems and stresses in your life (for
example, being in debt, not liking your major in college, being
bothered by memories of a childhood trauma). You likely can’t fix
the issues overnight, but just starting to tackle them should make you
feel at least a little better.
Talk to other people about your troubles and get their support
(friends, family, a professional counselor, a therapy group).
Exercise regularly.
Purposely fit fun, rewarding activities into your day. (Do truly fun
things that make life seem richer and fuller, not mainly time-killing
pursuits like flipping through TV channels.)
Consistently take time to relax.
Meditate regularly (mindfulness meditation, described in Chapter 5,
or another type).
Practice healthy eating habits.
Cut down on substances that can contribute to anxiety or depression,
like caffeine and alcohol.
Get enough quality sleep every night.
Get enough sunlight every day, especially if you live somewhere with
long, dark winters.
These suggestions can be extremely useful. Regular exercise alone can
sometimes do as much to quell anxiety as months of therapy. However,
because the ideas are so often suggested and easy to skim over, it’s common
to read them and go, “Yeah, yeah, yeah. Exercise more. Sleep better. Got it.
What else do you have for me?” If you’re not already doing them, give
some serious thought to acting on several of these recommendations. You’ll
be pleasantly surprised at how effective they are.
Suggestions for coping with anxiety in the moment
No matter what approach you take to dealing with your anxiety, you’ll be
able to handle it better as you get more experience with it. Initially, intense
anxiety is so scary and unfamiliar that it’s easy to get swept up in it without
stopping to think about what’s happening or where it’s taking you. The first
few times you get unusually nervous, it will catch you off guard. In time,
you’ll develop a better understanding of your personal anxious tendencies
and the course your anxiety takes when it comes on. You’ll learn to step
back, know what’s coming, and apply a coping strategy. The following
sections offer advice for dealing with anxiety when you’re on your own,
before an upcoming social event, during an event, and when you’re in the
middle of a social interaction.
Dealing with anxiety when you’re on your own
You can use these approaches if nerves strike when you’re, say, sitting at
home and start thinking about an upcoming party you have to attend. You
shouldn’t use these strategies in the absence of shifting your overall attitude
toward your anxiety, but as a spot treatment they’re fine.
When you start to feel anxious, ride out the symptoms
If you can be with your anxiety and not overreact to it, it will often pass on
its own (for more on this, see the previous chapter’s section on
mindfulness). Allowing your anxiety to play out may be uncomfortable, but
it will fade. Intense bouts of anxiety often feel longer than they are, but they
usually last only about five to fifteen minutes. Moderate nervous episodes
of the pace-around-your-house-while-worrying variety can linger longer,
maybe for an hour or two. That’s more inconvenient, but ultimately only a
small bit of the day.
Question the thoughts that are contributing to your anxiety
Sometimes you’ll be too worked up to logically disarm your nerves, but at
other moments, you’ll be able to calm yourself if you question the thinking
that’s feeding your anxiety (see the beginning of Chapter 5 for pointers).
For example, if an episode of nerves is getting more intense because you’re
thinking, “If I keep getting anxious like this, I’m going to go crazy,” you
could calm down by reminding yourself that real mental illness or
“craziness” doesn’t develop that way.
Distract yourself
You may feel too nervous to believe you can focus on something else
enough to distract yourself, but if you force it, your attention will often
move away from your anxiety, at least a little. You could put on some music
or a movie, play a game, practice a skill, begin a text conversation with a
family member, go for a walk, or throw yourself into a mentally demanding
project. The breathing and relaxation techniques described in the next
paragraph also have an element of distraction to them.
Calm yourself with deep breathing
Deep breathing puts your body into “relaxation mode,” which will help
counteract your anxiety because you can’t physiologically be relaxed and
keyed up at the same time. Breathing works best if you catch the anxiety
early. The essence of deep breathing is to breathe slowly and from your
abdomen.
One technique is called 4-7-8 Breathing. Breathe in through your nose for
four seconds. Hold the breath for seven seconds. Exhale through your
mouth for eight seconds. The exact numbers aren’t super important. The
key is that you’re thinking about your breathing while taking time to do
each step, instead of breathing rapidly, and that you’re holding your breath
and exhaling for twice as long as you’re inhaling. This technique overrides
your tendency to take quick, shallow breaths when you’re nervous, which
can make your physical symptoms worse by changing the ratio of carbon
dioxide in the body.
Most people will find this exercise harmless and relaxing. However, you
may want to be careful if your anxiety tends to get triggered whenever you
focus too much on your breathing.
Calm yourself with progressive muscle relaxation
This works through the same principle as deep breathing. A loose, relaxed
body is incompatible with a tense, nervous one. Set some time aside, make
yourself comfortable, and lie down. Take deep, slow breaths. Work your
way through each of your muscles, contracting them for about five seconds
and then releasing them as you exhale. You can make the exercise more
effective with some creative imagery. You could picture your stress and
tension as a gas being squeezed out of your muscles, or imagine your body
is melting into the bed or couch.
Put on soothing music or a recorded guided relaxation meditation
In a guided relaxation meditation, someone’s voice guides you into a state
of calm through instructions and soothing images (“You’re floating down a
warm, peaceful river on a sunny day. As you exhale you feel the tension
leaving your face”). There are lots of free recordings online. Do a search for
“relaxation meditation” or “rain sounds” or “relaxing music.”
Exercise
Exercising regularly over the long term is a very effective way to reduce
anxiety. It can also help in the short term by releasing mood-enhancing
chemicals and letting you burn off some of your nervous energy. Any kind
of exercise can do the job as long as it gets your blood pumping, even a
brisk walk around your neighborhood. There’s isn’t a single correct length
of time you need to exercise for. That will depend on how anxious you are
and how intensely you’re exerting yourself. Listen to your body and stop
when you feel yourself calming down.
Channel your anxious energy into something useful
Sometimes you’ll get really anxious and worked up, and even if you
ultimately handle it well, you may still feel amped up and on edge for a
little while. Getting nervous triggers chemicals in your body and puts it into
an alert state; sometimes it takes a while for all systems to return to normal.
Some people take the attitude of, “Well, if I have all this extra energy, I may
as well use it,” and then clean their bathroom or organize their apartment’s
storage locker.
Coping with nerves before an upcoming social event
Anticipating an upcoming social situation can cause you to feel anxious.
The types that tend to be the scariest are the ones you know you can’t back
out of. You start feeling at least a little nervous as soon as you know the
event will take place. The butterflies then build up more and more as the
occasion gets closer. As always, you can try the previously suggested
distraction and relaxation techniques or try to challenge or ride out your
worries. Here are some other ideas:
Accept that you probably won’t get rid of all your nerves
There are things you can do that may help you feel a little better, but in the
lead-up to the event, you’ll experience a degree of nerves that you’ll have to
manage as best you can. This is especially true if you’re encountering a
certain situation for the first time (like a get-together with your significant
other’s coworkers) or there’s something unique about this particular event.
Although you have only so many options for feeling better in the short
term, in the long run you may be able to put yourself in that scenario often
enough that it doesn’t bother you as much.
Prepare and practice
You won’t be as nervous if you’re reasonably confident you’re ready for the
situation. Unfortunately, it’s harder to prepare for loose, improvised social
events like dates and parties than it is for predictable, performance-based
ones like class presentations. You can semi-prepare for less structured
events by coming up with questions or topics you could discuss. It may not
make for the most ground-breaking few minutes of conversation, but it will
help you get through an anxious patch.
You could also devise a general strategy for approaching the event. For
example, when you’re planning to attend a party, decide that first you’ll
catch up with your buddies, and then you’ll ask them to introduce you to
their friends so you won’t have to do it yourself. Then you’ll head to the
backyard and try to join the people who are talking there.
These kinds of preparations will never be able to account for everything
that may come up, but even planning ahead a little can make you feel more
on top of things.
Another way to warm up for unstructured events is to socialize earlier in
the day, ideally in a way that roughly parallels the situation you’re anxious
about. For example, if you’re scheduled to hang out one-on-one with a new
friend that evening, you could have coffee earlier in the day with a family
member.
Coping with anxiety when you’re at a social event, but not talking to
anyone
When you’re at an event, a bout of nerves may hit you as you’re off to the
side and not speaking to someone, or if you’re in a group conversation but
hanging back. Here’s what you can do:
Ride out the symptoms: They’ll likely pass in a few minutes.
Use deep breathing: With other people around, you won’t be able to
close your eyes and lie down, but you can still take some subtle
calming breaths.
Put your attention on the current moment: Get your focus out of
your head. If you’re in a group, really pay attention to the
conversation. If you’re on the edge of a party, really take in what’s
going on around you—the music, the noises, what other people are
doing.
Jump into an interaction: It’s counterintuitive, but if you’re the
kind of person who gets nervous before social interactions but is fine
once you’re in them, one of the best ways to take your mind off your
jitters is to get into a casual conversation with someone. At the
moment, this may be easier said than done, but it could become an
option in the future.
Coping with anxiety when you’re in the middle of talking to someone
Nerves are toughest to deal with when they occur as you’re talking to
someone. When anxiety hits, accept that it may interfere with that particular
interaction and there’s only so much you can do about it. Over the long run,
you may get a better handle on your anxiety so you’re less nervous in that
situation, but when you’re just starting to deal with your nerves, realize it
won’t go perfectly. Here are some approaches that have been covered
earlier:
Ride out the symptoms: When you’re anxious around people, usually
your nerves spike for a minute or two and then start to dissipate. If
you can hang in there through the worst of it, they’ll usually go away.
Have some prepared questions and answers you can fall back on:
When you’re anxious, you aren’t as fast at thinking on your feet. So
prepare some standard getting-to-know-you questions. Likewise,
practice the kinds of answers you’ve said a million times before and
don’t have to think too hard about (for example, a spiel about your
job or a hobby).
Accept that you may indeed look nervous. Accept your
circumstances, and realize it doesn’t have to ruin that conversation or
the entire outing.
Remove the pressure of trying to hide your anxiety by admitting
you’re nervous. You can do this by mentioning your nervousness in
an offhand, self-assured way and then get on with the interaction.
Any normal person won’t care if you’re a tad anxious, especially if
the jitters only last for a few moments before you find your footing.
Realize that your outward symptoms of anxiety often aren’t as obvious as it
feels they are
Symptoms like blushing are clearly visible, but others feel like they’re more
obvious than they are. Even when someone is fairly panicky, it often
doesn’t stand out that much to an observer. The person just looks a little
tense and preoccupied. Knowing this can reassure you enough to calm
down.
Be more of a listener or talker, whichever one you have an easier time with
You may be more comfortable listening when you’re anxious. You can put
on an interested face, place your attention on your conversation partner,
avoid your worried thoughts, and buy yourself some time for your nerves to
settle. For other people, anxiety and listening don’t go well together; all that
time when they should be listening allows them to retreat into their heads
and zero in on how nervous they’re feeling. Some people are actually better
at riding out their anxiety when they’re doing most of the talking, likely
about something they can go on about without having to think too much.
Coping with nerves while trying to do optional social behaviors
You may find yourself anxiously on the sidelines contemplating a social
move, one that makes you nervous and which you don’t have to do. These
usually involve approaching people under circumstances where they might
reject you, like talking to a stranger at a party or inviting someone to hang
out.
These situations create an approach-avoidance conflict. Certain factors
make you want to do (approach) the behavior, like a desire to form
meaningful relationships. Factors like a fear of being made fun of compel
you to avoid doing the same thing. When you’re at a distance, the approach
factors are stronger. You don’t feel as scared, and may even be eager to go
ahead. As you get closer to doing the behavior, the avoidance factors kick in
and often make you bail out at the last second. You may get stuck mentally
when the two forces are in balance (“Okay, I’m feeling better. I’m going to
talk to them. Here I go… Ah! Still too nervous! Okay, let me regroup…”).
Here are some ways you can make yourself act.
Give yourself time to calm down
If you arrive at an event where you have the option of doing a scary social
action, it often helps to take time to collect yourself and let your anxiety
fade somewhat. For example, when you show up at a party, you may feel
too nervous to join any conversations right away. However, if you’re not
too hard on yourself for being hesitant and give yourself a moment, you
may soon build up the gumption to do it. This may require several cycles of
“beginning to approach and bailing out at the last moment” before you
finally go ahead, but if you’re patient, you’ll get there.
Dive in before you have time to think
This is the opposite of the “give yourself time” suggestion and can work if
the optional behavior is only a little bit anxiety-inducing for you. After you
arrive at the venue, start socializing before you have time for the avoidance
factors to really kick in. For example, at a party, jump into a conversation
with an unfamiliar group as soon as you put your coat away, if not before.
Maybe that one interaction won’t go perfectly, but at least you’ll have some
momentum.
Warm up socially
Warming up socially allows you to mentally shift from hanging out by
yourself to being in a social frame of mind where you’re comfortable
engaging with others. You can warm up ahead of the event by socializing
earlier in the day. At the event, you can have a few quick, easy interactions
before tackling the ones that make you more nervous. For example, at an
Internet meet-up, you could start by chatting to the friendly organizer you
already know before trying to talk to someone you’ve never met. You could
continue the process by approaching some non-intimidating strangers and
then moving on to more intimidating ones. (This is actually a condensed
version of the gradual exposure process outlined in the next chapter.)
Force your hand a little
If you’re close to being able to execute a behavior, this may be the final
nudge you need. You could promise yourself a reward, like a nice meal, if
you go through with it. You could tell a sympathetic friend you’ll buy them
a drink if you don’t talk to anyone new at the pub that night. You could
create a sense of urgency by telling yourself, “Okay, I have to leave this
meet-up in half an hour, and I have to speak to at least one person before
then.” What will likely happen is that you’ll still be scared for the next
twenty-five minutes, but once you realize time is running out, you’ll think,
“Okay, it’s now or never. I may as well just do it!” The time pressure takes
away your ability to overthink things and not act.
Don’t force yourself too much, however. You want to give yourself a gentle
push, but still have it ultimately be your decision to act or not. A drink is
one thing, but if you tell your friend with all seriousness that they can have
your car if you don’t start any conversations, it’s not really a choice any
longer. Any reasonable person would make themselves chat with someone
new to save their car, even if they were a mess the entire time and could
never do it on their own.
Build up some courage
You’ll usually feel a bit rusty at the start of each event during which you
want to perform the anxiety-producing behavior. Even if you’ve managed to
do it in the past, some of your courage will have worn off, and you’ll need
to get the ball rolling again. The first few interactions you have will feel the
creakiest, but then you’ll settle back into your groove.
Don’t be too tough on yourself
It’s easy to beat yourself up for not being brave enough to follow through
on an optional social behavior. You may feel like you’re failing by hovering
around a group at a pub, trying to work up the gumption to talk to them. It’s
not that big a deal. It’s extremely typical for people to feel reluctant in these
kinds of uncertain social situations.
Use the principles of gradual exposure to get comfortable with your fears in
the longer term
The previous suggestions address how to get past your nerves after you’re
already in the setting where you want to do the optional behavior and you
just need to go for it. In the longer term, the best way to get used to the
things that make you nervous is to expose yourself to them gradually. The
next chapter goes into detail about this.
7
Reducing Fears and Insecurities through
Real-World Experiences
THE IDEAS IN THE PREVIOUS CHAPTERS certainly help reduce counterproductive
thinking. However, some beliefs are hardier and will start to fade only when
they’ve been overwritten by contradictory real-world experiences.
Sometimes you’ll have a fear or belief that you logically know is
inaccurate, but it still feels true and limits your behavior.
In these cases, analyzing and debunking your thoughts isn’t enough. For
one, your mind won’t give much weight to the conclusions you come to. It
responds much more strongly to real-life evidence, and wrong or not, as far
as your mind is concerned, it has past experiences that show the belief is
reasonable. You may feel like you’ve successfully disarmed a belief, but it
will often return. The other problem is that when you have a fear or
insecurity, it can generate a nearly endless supply of worried thoughts. If
you debunk some of them, new ones will just take their place (for example,
if you’re scared to talk to people at parties and defuse your worries about
being made fun of, you may develop new ones about accidentally making
someone angry).
The bulk of this chapter covers how to get used to the social situations
that make you nervous. But first, it explains how real-world experiences can
affect your mind-set about socializing and reduce insecurities and limiting
beliefs that don’t necessarily have a big anxiety component to them.
Knowing why you must gain firsthand experiences
Real-life feedback can overwrite unhelpful beliefs, but the process is
gradual. Say you have the belief, “I’m boring and people don’t enjoy my
company.” As you begin to polish your social skills, people will begin to
show you that they like having you around. The first few times it happens,
you’ll probably dismiss it as a fluke. As it keeps happening, you’ll
tentatively start to accept that some people do like your company; you may
adopt some more self-assured behaviors, but you’ll largely remain
skeptical. With enough time, the way you see yourself will stop lagging
behind your actual progress, and you’ll be able to see yourself in a more
positive light. Some traces of the original insecurity may always remain, but
should be easy enough to act against.
The process is the same for useful attitudes like “Don’t care too much
about what other people think.” Again, you can’t instantly take on that
mentality because you’ve read it’s good to have. On a deeper level, you
may fear other people’s opinion of you. However, over many small
occasions, you can choose to do things you want to do, but may draw some
negative responses (for example, speaking up with a less-popular belief,
wearing unconventional clothes). As you continually experience firsthand
that acting that way has benefits and that you can handle the consequences,
it slowly reinforces the importance of not being overly concerned with what
other people think of you. (“When I made that edgy joke, one or two people
made mildly uncomfortable faces, but it wasn’t so bad. Everyone else
thought it was really funny. And it just felt good not to hold back my sense
of humor like I always used to.”)
A common piece of social advice in this vein is to “Fake it ’til you make
it.” That is, force yourself to act outwardly confident even though you don’t
feel that sure of yourself deep down; then let the positive reinforcement that
comes from your self-assured behavior build true confidence. This
suggestion has limits. You may feel comfortable outwardly faking some
confident behaviors, but others will be too nerve-racking and too much of a
leap from how you normally act. If you’re really insecure, anxious, and
socially inexperienced, you can’t slip on the persona of someone who’s
highly confident just like that. However, you may be able to pull off smaller
tasks, like introducing yourself to someone at your job when you otherwise
would have taken a pass.
The importance of facing your fears
If a social situation really makes you nervous, you need to put yourself in it
until you get comfortable with it. You may never be completely unfazed by
the situation, but you can get to a point where your fear is low enough that
it doesn’t keep you from going after what you want.
Exposing yourself to a fear works because it overwrites your mind’s
association of Situation–> Cue to get nervous. However, to do that, you
need to be around your fear long enough that you calm down and
experience firsthand you’ll be okay. If you briefly put yourself in contact
with something scary, then bolt while you’re still feeling nervous, your
brain hasn’t learned anything new.
When it comes to situations that make you only mildly uneasy, just
knowing this may be enough to get you to start changing your behavior. For
example, inviting people to hang out may make you mildly anxious to the
point that if you live on autopilot, you’ll default to not extending invitations
to anyone. Once you’re aware it’s important to offer invites, it may be easy
enough for you to take a deep breath and go through with it.
If you have a fear that’s more intense, you need to be more strategic about
facing it. Psychologists have found the most effective way to face a fear is
to gradually expose yourself to it; this is called exposure therapy. You start
with a milder variation of your fear, face that until you’re comfortable with
it, and then work your way up to more nerve-racking scenarios. You do the
exposure sessions frequently enough that you build up some courage
momentum. For example, if you were afraid of standing on balconies, you
would start on some lower floors and slowly work your way up (literally) to
higher ones.
Facing your fears isn’t as easy or tidy when it comes to social situations
It would be easy to face a fear of standing on high balconies in a way that’s
totally controlled and on your terms. Socializing is trickier. People aren’t
inanimate features of a building that you just have to be around to get used
to. You have to interact with them, and their responses can be unpredictable.
Your feelings toward them are more complex too. Most people’s selfesteem
isn’t going to be affected that much if they don’t like balconies, but
your confidence can suffer if you can’t socialize effectively.
It’s also harder to design a tidy way to gradually face many social fears.
The social situations you need to expose yourself to may not be available
when you want them, or they may not last long enough or go well enough
for you to experience the necessary relaxation and sense that things are
under control. The progression from one step to the next may not be clear,
creating unavoidable large increases in difficulty from one to the next. Reallife
friends, classmates, and colleagues aren’t robots that you can endlessly
experiment with for your own purposes. This is not to say that facing your
fears is pointless when it comes to socializing. The principles of gradual
exposure are still very useful. The process of applying them is just messier,
and it helps to know that going in.
How to face your bigger social fears gradually
With the background theory out of the way, here’s a practical step-by-step
guide to how you can slowly get used to the social situations that make you
uncomfortable.
Be at a point where you’re really ready to make changes
The approach outlined below is the easiest way to face your fears, but even
then the process won’t be effortless. Facing a fear gradually with the aid of
coping skills will make the task as pleasant as it can be, but you’re still
going to voluntarily put yourself in situations that make you feel anxious. It
will take a few months of steady work. So you need to be at a place where
you’re really motivated to overcome your fear. It’s not unusual for someone
to have a fear for years, but do nothing more than avoid the situations that
scare them. Even if they hate how much their fear restricts their life, they
still prefer that to the work and discomfort of getting over it.
Before facing any fears, get a handle on the distorted beliefs and
thinking that contribute to your anxiety in social situations
This point is extremely important. If you try to face your fears but leave all
of your counterproductive beliefs intact, you’re not going to get far. You’ll
go into every encounter feeling like it’s life or death. If it doesn’t go well,
according to your unrealistic standards, you’ll come away with the wrong
conclusions and feel even more dejected and discouraged. If an interaction
doesn’t go smoothly, you need to be able to put it in the proper perspective.
Learn and get some practice applying the concepts in Chapter 5 first.
Following a process for facing your fears gradually
The general method for facing a fear is to break it down into a hierarchy
from Least Scary to Most Scary variations, then regularly face the fears,
beginning at the easiest tasks and working your way up to the tougher ones.
You can use rewards and debriefing sessions to stay motivated and on track.
Here’s the process explained in detail:
Break your fear down into a hierarchy of Least Scary to Most Scary
variations
Here’s an example using a fear of talking to new people at parties:
1. Go to a party and briefly nod and smile at several people.
2. Go to a party and ask several people a quick question, politely
listen to their answer, and then excuse yourself from the
conversation.
3. Go to a party and ask a friend to introduce you to several people.
4. Go to a party and introduce yourself to one person who seems
friendly and approachable, and who you’re not particularly
concerned with impressing.
5. Go to a party and join a group of approachable people. Don’t put
pressure on yourself to wow them or say too much. The idea is just
to join them.
6. Go to a party, join a group, and try to talk to them a bit more.
7. Go to a party and talk to someone who intimidates you somewhat,
but whom you’d still like to get to know.
8. Go to a party and join a more intimidating group.
It’s all right if not every step in the hierarchy constitutes a “proper” way to
expose yourself to your fears—that is, you face it long enough that you no
longer feel nervous. As long as a step is leading up to that, it’s okay. For
example, if you’re afraid of going to nightclubs, just setting foot in one for
a minute may be all you can handle at first. That’s fine as long as you’re
using it as a jumping-off point to stay longer next time.
Similar fears can be tackled similarly
Social fears come in many forms, and some of them need to be tackled on a
case-by-case basis. However, some fears are similar and can be faced in
similar ways, which is helpful if you experience variations of the same fear:
Fears of being in a certain environment, like a party, a dance club, or
a movie theater where you’re seeing a film alone. In this case, your
goal for each fear-facing session is to put yourself in that
environment. Eventually you want to be able to stay there long
enough that you start to calm down and realize that nothing bad is
going to happen.
Fears about certain types of interactions, like making conversation,
approaching strangers, or inviting friends to hang out. The
interactions themselves are often on the shorter side, so in each fearfacing
session, you should try to carry them out multiple times. The
first conversation you have might be nerve-racking, but the seventh
may feel quite tolerable. Of course, this volume approach isn’t
always possible. If you shy away from inviting people out, you may
not have enough friends and acquaintances to invite every time you
want to practice facing that particular fear.
Practice less scary variations of your fear in several ways
When creating a hierarchy, you can come up with many easier variations on
the situation you’re ultimately afraid of:
Do the same basic action as your fear, but a simpler, less intense
version (for example, talking to someone approachable vs. someone
you’re more on edge around, going to a club on a slow weekday
night vs. on a busy weekend).
Do the same action as your fear, but cut it off early (for example,
asking someone a quick question and making an excuse to leave vs.
sticking around to talk, like you hope to do eventually).
Do something different from, and easier than, your fear, but that
brings up similar feelings (for example, instead of chatting to
strangers at a music festival, chatting to shop clerks or asking people
on the street for directions).
Practice the exact thing you fear, but in a controlled, artificial setting
(for example, role-playing assertiveness techniques with a therapist
or in a social skills training group).
If you’re very afraid of something, initial steps may be imagining yourself
facing your fear or looking at pictures related to it.
It can also help to start dealing with other non-social fears you may have
so you can build your confidence in your ability to overcome your anxieties
(for example, facing a milder hesitation toward learning to drive).
Here are a few more examples of fear-facing progressions:
Feeling uncomfortable in nightclubs
1. Go to a non-intimidating, low-key pub in the afternoon on a slow day.
2. Go to a non-intimidating pub in the evening on a slow day.
3. Go to a non-intimidating pub at night on a slightly busy night.
4. Go to a non-intimidating pub at night on a busier night.
5. Go to a somewhat intimidating nightclub early in the evening on a slow
night.
6. Go to a somewhat intimidating nightclub at night on a somewhat busy
night.
7. Go to a somewhat intimidating nightclub at night when it’s busy.
8. Go to a quite intimidating nightclub early in the evening on a slow
night.
9. Go to a quite intimidating nightclub at night on a somewhat busy night.
10. Go to a quite intimidating nightclub at night when it’s busy.
Feeling uneasy with speaking up in groups
Have several hierarchies going at the same time:
Start with short, simple contributions and then work your way up to
more lengthy, involved, or controversial ones.
Start by speaking up in smaller groups, and build up to sharing in
bigger ones.
Start with groups that are low key and easy to chime in to, and work
up to rowdier discussions where you have to be assertive to be heard.
Start with friendly groups that don't scare you, and work up to
speaking in ones that intimidate you more.
Work up to dropping your safety behaviors
Safety behaviors (see Chapter 3) get in the way of overcoming fears. Even
if you successfully face a situation, in the back of your mind you can
always reason, “Well, X is still dangerous. It was just the safety behavior
that got me through it.” They keep you from realizing that your fear is
manageable and that you can handle it without any help. If you use any
safety behaviors and they seem to help you, by all means stick with them at
first. But as you make more progress in facing your fears, try to drop them
and go it alone.
Face the actual situation that scares you; doing zany, gutsy stunts won’t
help much
Some people, when thinking about facing their social fears, say to
themselves, “I’m generally afraid of rejection, so I’ll get over that fear by
doing a bunch of outrageous things to mess with strangers and get shot
down as hard as possible. If I can get used to going up to random people
and acting like a chicken, then anything else, like talking to guests at a
party, will be a cakewalk.”
It does take guts to act strangely around someone you don’t know, and it
may help build your courage, but the carryover to more low-key, day-to-day
social situations isn’t as big as you might think. When you’re purposely
being odd and screwing with people, you know deep down that it’s just a
lark. You’ll probably never see that person again, and you’re not putting the
“real you” on the line. It’s not the same as approaching someone to make
genuine conversation and knowing the other person is going to respond to
your true personality and interpersonal skills.
Start facing your fears, beginning with the least scary items
The item in your hierarchy you decide to start with has to feel manageable.
It should push your limits, but only a little. It’s okay if it makes you slightly
hesitant and requires some willpower to face, but no more than that. If the
thought of doing it makes you frozen and jittery, it’s too much for you to
handle right now. You need to begin with something simpler. People often
quit when facing their fears and then declare that the process doesn’t work
because they jump straight to a step that’s too overwhelming. Ideally your
starter task should feel so simple that you think, “This is too easy. Do I even
need to do this? Maybe I should start with something harder.”
Only move up the ladder when you’re fully used to the previous step.
“Used to” means it only causes you mild anxiety, and is even starting to feel
mundane and boring. You may reach this point for some steps in a day. You
may have to stick to other steps for a few weeks. Don’t be in a hurry to
complete your hierarchy. There’s no award for finishing quickly, especially
if you rush so much that you don’t really lock in your improvement.
The relevant thing is facing the fear, not the outcome of the interaction
When you’re exposing yourself to a fear, your goal is to put yourself in a
certain situation and get used to it. Don’t worry about any other outcomes.
If you want to get more comfortable chatting to people at parties, all that
matters is that you’re starting those interactions. For now, it’s irrelevant if
you weren’t an enrapturing storyteller. If you want to get used to inviting
people out, as long as you asked, it’s unimportant whether they said yes or
no.
Once you’re on the scene, know some ways to get yourself to face your fear
When you’ve arrived at the situation where your fear is, you then have to
take the step of actually confronting it. It’s very common to get there and
then hesitate for a good while before taking the plunge. The end of the
previous chapter covered some ways to get yourself to act.
Once you’re face-to-face with your fear, have ways to cope in the moment
Once you’re facing your fear, you’re going to feel anxious. You’ll start to
calm down if you stick around long enough, but until then, it helps to have
some other ways to deal with your anxious symptoms. The previous chapter
covered this as well.
Partial progress is an accomplishment too
It’s important to give yourself credit for even partial progress toward facing
a fear. For example, if you’re fearful of talking to strangers at pubs, you
may go out to several venues and not be able to talk to anyone for three
outings in a row. However, on the first night you were only 40 percent of
the way there. On the second night you were 70 percent close, and 90
percent on the third. Maybe on the fourth night you finally did it. That
interaction wouldn’t have been possible without those other three sessions,
which may have appeared to be failures if you only looked at them in more
simplistic “either I talked to someone or I didn’t” terms.
Debrief yourself after each exposure session
Each time you face your fear, it may bring up some counterproductive
thinking, such as “That person thought I was a creep when I said hi to them.
Why do I even bother? I’ll never get the hang of this.” You must not
unquestionably swallow these thoughts, or you may set yourself further
back than where you began. Use the principles from Chapter 5 to address
that thinking properly.
Don’t dissect only the insecure thoughts you had. Remind yourself of
what went well too. Did you face the fear with a lot less hesitation
compared to last time? Did you find yourself thinking in any constructive
ways that helped you feel more confident? Build up a written record of your
small and large successes.
Reward and congratulate yourself every step of the way
Every time you accomplish something listed in your hierarchy that you
couldn’t do before, you should give yourself a pat on the back and treat
yourself. Your reward doesn’t have to be anything big, just something that
adds a little oomph to your day and caps off the sense of accomplishment
you already feel. This is another effective behavioral psychology principle
that makes the process easier. Something can seem less scary if you know a
treat and sense of satisfaction are waiting for you on the other side.
You can also use rewards in different ways to motivate yourself: Specify
something you like doing (for example, checking your favorite websites),
and then tell yourself you can’t do that until you meet your fear-facing goals
for the day. This approach can be extremely effective if you pick the right
carrot for yourself. You’ll find yourself sitting around thinking, “Man, I
really want to play more of that game I just bought. I guess I’d better get
out there and try talking to people.” When you meet your daily objective,
you’ll be proud of yourself and looking forward to the fun activity you’ve
earned.
Face your fears on a regular basis and work up your hierarchy
Map out a schedule for how you’ll work through each subfear. Not every
fear lends itself to daily practice, but you can improvise. You may not be
able to go to a party six days a week, but you could pledge to practice
starting conversations by going to some Internet meet-ups.
The more often you work on exposing yourself to your fears, the better,
because it keeps the momentum going. Building up your courage is like
exercising to increase your physical fitness. You’ll tend to lose your
courage “gains” if you leave too much time between exposure sessions. You
may not lose your gains completely, but you’ll lose enough that you’ll have
to take some extra time to regain the few steps you lost.
Don’t think you’re cured after facing a scarier fear one time
The first time you successfully face one of your bigger fears, you’ll
probably be over the moon. In your excitement, you may feel like you’ve
solved all of your problems, but you’ve really only taken the first step. It’s
common for people to face their fear during one session and then get
discouraged when they go out a few days later and find they’re nervous all
over again.
Facing your fear for the first time is a huge accomplishment, but you need
to repeatedly face it to solidify your progress. It’s like lifting weights. If you
want to be able to consistently move a certain amount, you have to
regularly exercise with it. You’ll often face your fear for the first time on a
day when you’re unusually confident, but then you’ll find it takes more
work to get to the point where you can reliably deal with it when your mood
is more average. You have to face your fear again and again and again to
overcome it.
You will hit snags
It’s rare to plan out a fear hierarchy and effortlessly move up it. You have to
be flexible and make adjustments as you go. You may find you have the
order of the steps wrong. You could complete one rung and find the next
step is too challenging, so you need to find a task to bridge the two.
It’s also common to encounter an early step that is too hard to do once
you’re face-to-face with it, even if it seemed surmountable on paper. You’ll
need to add something more basic ahead of it. The key is not to get
discouraged when these hiccups happen; just keep making tweaks so the
overall project stays doable.
Finally, your progress may seem to slip at times. You may go out one day
and face your fears easily, feel on top of the world, and then try again the
next day but find you’re nervous once more. When this happens, keep
moving forward and focus on the overall improvements you’re making. To
use the exercise analogy again, when people take up strength training,
they’ll have the odd bad workout, even though they’re getting stronger on
the whole. This is completely normal.
If you conquer a fear and then go a long time without facing it, you’ll
probably regress
If you do regress, it will take work to get your courage back, though it will
come much quicker than the first time. Once more, it’s like exercising. It’s
always easier to get back into shape than to get fit from scratch. A common
scenario is for someone to work to overcome their social fear, go on to
achieve their other interpersonal goals, and then “get out of shape” because
they no longer need to deal with the old challenge. For example, someone
with fears around initiating conversations and inviting people out gets
comfortable with those skills, makes a bunch of friends, and no longer
needs to meet anyone new. If they want to freshen up their social circle
years down the road, they may find they’re nervous about approaching
people again.
8
Increasing Your Self-Esteem and Confidence
LOW SELF-CONFIDENCE LIES at the root of many people’s shyness, social
anxiety, and insecurities. This chapter addresses the most important points
for improving your self-confidence (aside from the concepts that have
already been covered, like how to dispute counterproductive thoughts) by
covering two concepts that both fall under the term “self-confidence.” The
first is core self-esteem, which is your overall assessment of your worth as a
person. The second is how self-assured, competent, and brave you feel in
specific social situations—your situational confidence (for example, “I feel
confident about how I’ll do at the party tonight”).
Having high self-esteem gives you strengths that will override aspects of
shyness, anxiety, insecurity, and pessimism. People with high self-esteem
feel good about themselves and what they have to offer, are more optimistic
and more prepared to take risks, and are better able to tolerate uncertainty,
discomfort, and rejection. Their positive feelings about themselves are
stable and come from within, and their emotions don’t constantly go up and
down based on outside factors, like whether enough people smiled at them
in the hallway that day. Having a healthy level of self-esteem does not mean
being arrogant, boastful, and entitled. That mentality is damaging and may
be an indication of deeper feelings of inferiority; it’s not true self-esteem at
all.
Having situational confidence is similarly helpful. You’ll feel calmer and
surer of yourself, you’ll perform better, you’ll have an easier time putting
yourself out there, and you’ll tend to make a better impression on others.
Ways to increase your core self-esteem
There’s no one path to increasing your core self-esteem. Rather there are
many things you can do that add up to feeling more sure of yourself.
Practice self-acceptance and realize it’s okay to be a normal, less-thanperfect
person
The foundation of good self-esteem is realizing you’re okay the way you
are. People sometimes imagine that if they had high self-esteem, they’d feel
cocksure and amped up all the time, but having good self-esteem feels more
like a deep, solid level of comfort with yourself. You’re aware of your
personality traits and quirks, your strengths and weaknesses, your successes
and failures, and you’re fine with the overall package they create. The
following factors play into being self-accepting:
Realizing that it’s all right to be a regular human who makes
mistakes and isn’t perfect. Everyone gets things wrong sometimes,
and it doesn’t mean they’re broken through and through.
Setting realistic standards for yourself and letting go of
perfectionism. People with low self-esteem sometimes believe they
won’t be able to feel good about themselves unless they become an
overachieving superhuman who’s the complete opposite of how they
are now.
Being nice and compassionate to yourself. Accepting yourself
means being on your own side. If you mess up, you can look at the
situation with an understanding eye, rather than tearing into yourself.
People are sometimes wary about the idea of being self-accepting. Being
self-accepting doesn’t mean you have to condone or approve of everything
you do wrong or embrace all your flaws. However, when you do make a
mistake, you don’t need to disown everything about yourself. But don’t
think you need to abandon all desire to change or improve yourself either.
Instead, acknowledge that there are areas in your life you’d benefit from
working on. The well-known saying is “You’re fine the way you are… and
there’s always room for improvement.” When you accept yourself, personal
development is something you choose to do because you see how it will add
to your life, instead of viewing it as something you have to do to stay a few
steps ahead of your supposed intrinsic shamefulness.
Similarly, being more self-accepting doesn’t mean you’ll become content
in your rut and lose all desire to grow and achieve. If something is truly
important to you, you’ll still go after it. It’s human nature to keep moving
forward. However, you may find yourself losing interest in goals that were
mostly a means of gaining faux self-esteem. For example, someone might
retain their desire to become an artist because it makes them happy to
develop their creative potential, but be less motivated to own an expensive
wardrobe, because they didn’t want it for anything other than to impress
people.
Question the negative messages you’ve internalized about your value as
a person
A core reason people develop low self-esteem is that at some point in their
lives, they came to believe they were fundamentally defective. Usually this
is because of messages they received and took to heart when they were
young and impressionable. Kids can pick up these messages from the
people they’re closest to, either by hearing their words directly or through
interpretations of their behavior (for example, a father has a horrible temper,
and his children take it to mean there’s something wrong with them).
The messages can also take the form of ubiquitous, taken-for-granted
cultural values about what it means to be a worthwhile person. However,
many of these messages are inaccurate and harmful. When several are taken
together, they often suggest that there’s something wrong with anyone who
doesn’t fit the standard mold. Here are a few cultural messages related to
socializing:
There’s something wrong with you if you’re not effortlessly socially
savvy.
There’s something wrong with you if you’re not naturally sociable
and like spending time alone.
There’s something wrong with you if you feel shy or unsure of
yourself in social situations.
There’s something wrong with you if you don’t have a giant group of
friends.
There’s something wrong with you if you have quirky, nonmainstream
interests.
There’s something wrong with you if you don’t always act like a
traditional man or woman.
Here are few cultural messages not necessarily related to socializing that
cause many people problems:
You’re not a worthwhile person unless you achieve a ton in your life.
You’re not worthwhile as a person unless you earn a certain salary.
You’re not a worthwhile person unless you have a professional,
white-collar job.
You’re not worthwhile as a woman unless you get married and start a
family.
You’re not worthwhile as a man unless you’ve had a lot of sexual
conquests.
These messages are wrong and potentially damaging. No one’s intrinsic
worth is lower because they don’t meet some random societal criteria.
Someone isn’t automatically inferior just because they don’t have a lot of
friends or the right job. Is a doctor who has devoted her life to operating on
premature infants a “loser” just because she sometimes feels shy at parties?
Of course, you may want to have more friends or a higher paying career,
and you recognize the advantages they provide, but that’s different from
believing you’re an inherent failure for not acquiring them.
Whatever negative messages they received, people with low self-esteem
believe them in a very strong, unthinking way. You can bolster your selfesteem
if you identify, question, discredit, and stop living by the negative
statements you follow. Some of them will stop affecting you as soon as you
stop and think about them for a few minutes. Others will be harder to shake.
Many socializing-related messages are so entrenched that they just feel
right. If you had a particularly rough childhood, you may need to see a
counselor or support group to dismantle the negative core beliefs about your
value as a person that were instilled during your upbringing. If you’re
younger, you may also need to gain more life experience and perspective
before you can accept that certain ideas aren’t true (for example, when
you’re still in high school, it can seem like your life hinges on your social
status. Once you’re older, you can look back and see how overemphasized
it was).
Gain self-esteem through your actions, behaviors, and
accomplishments
A contradiction lies at the heart of self-esteem: On one hand, everyone has
inherent value that doesn’t depend on their actions or accomplishments.
Self-esteem comes from within. It’s not something other people bestow on
you or a prize you earn after you’ve achieved enough to prove to the world
that you’re worthy.
On the other hand, self-esteem is partially affected by how you behave. It
gauges whether you’re living in a way that’s important to you. If your life is
not in a place you want it to be, your self-esteem will decrease. However,
you can change your behaviors to boost it.
Make improvements in the areas where you’re unhappy
Your self-esteem is affected negatively when you know you’re missing
something vital. One of these missing pieces could be poor social skills.
They could also be problems in other spheres, like your finances, health, or
career. Whatever your issues are, you should feel better about yourself once
you get them under control. Doing so will take time because you can’t make
sweeping changes to your life in a few days. Though if you’ve been
directionless and discouraged, just having a basic action plan for how
you’re going to start working on your problems may lift your self-esteem a
bit.
It can be tricky to approach this point with the right mentality. Above all
else, you should try to develop a foundation of core self-acceptance and a
belief system that’s reasonably free of harmful messages. Without a solid
belief in yourself, you’ll approach your weaker areas with the unconscious
mentality of, “I’m worthless at my core. I’ll cancel that truth by getting a lot
of people to like me / succeeding in my field / making a lot of money.” That
mind-set may allow you to achieve a lot, and you may even temporarily feel
better, but the confidence it creates is fragile and short-lived.
You need to directly address your core lack of self-esteem. You can’t
cover it up and compensate for it through outside sources of validation. This
is not to say you should put all of your goals on hold until you become 100
percent self-accepting. Try to cultivate your goals at the same time as you
work on accepting yourself.
Live a life based on core self-affirming practices
Your self-esteem monitors whether you’re living a life based on certain key
practices and then adjusts itself accordingly.
Practices that raise self-esteem:
thinking and being responsible for yourself and choosing your own
path through life
living a life based on your own values, even when you encounter
resistance
showing the world your true self, even if not everyone responds well
to it
treating yourself with respect and standing up for your rights
living constructively (for example, exercising regularly, trying to
form meaningful social relationships, managing your finances)
doing work and creating things that are meaningful and important to
you
Opposing practices that will lower self-esteem:
blindly following other people’s ideas about how you should live
breaking or selling out your deepest values (for example, valuing
self-sufficiency, but purposely mooching off your family members)
hiding your true self in order to gain approval from others
letting others walk all over you
living destructively (for example, abusing drugs, isolating yourself
even though you want human contact, constantly wasting money)
not doing work that feels meaningful to you
You could argue that principles like these are hardwired into people,
though everyone varies in which ones they emphasize. For example, one
person may feel a strong pull to have a personally fulfilling career and lose
self-esteem if they’re doing something just to pay the bills. Someone else
may be happy to take any old job and put more importance on thinking for
themselves. Living by these standards takes consistent work, and it’s easy to
unintentionally stray off course. Not perfectly fulfilling them doesn’t mean
you’re a failure.
Work to develop positive traits
You’ll feel a greater sense of self-esteem if you have some things going for
you. Take time to develop your existing positive traits, or work to attain
new ones. This could involve trying to cultivate certain aspects of your
personality or learning a new skill. However, developing these
characteristics only works if it’s frosting on top of a deeper positive view of
yourself. You can’t just pile up a bunch of talents to smother a core sense of
self-loathing.
Take on challenges and accomplish goals you set for yourself
You can’t help but feel more confident if you’ve had some successes. The
goals you choose to pursue will vary based on what’s important to you.
Challenging yourself also increases your feelings of self-efficacy, that is,
the sense that you’re generally competent and flexible, and can handle what
life throws at you.
Create an environment that supports your self-esteem
All else being equal, who’s likelier to have good self-esteem: someone who
works a degrading job and whose “friends” and partner constantly belittle
them, or someone who has supportive, encouraging people in their life? On
one level, your self-esteem shouldn’t depend on what other people think
about you. You should be able to brush aside the inaccurate, hurtful things
they say. On another level, you’re human, and if you’re constantly
undermined and insulted, it can’t help but drag you down. Try to improve or
discard your toxic relationships, and seek out friends who make you feel
good about yourself.
Use short-term self-esteem boosts when appropriate
Some suggestions for raising your self-esteem provide only a short-lived
boost to your mood. Sometimes you just want to cheer yourself up, though,
so there’s nothing wrong with using them for the occasional pick-me-up.
Here are some ideas:
Take time to remind yourself of your positive traits and
accomplishments.
Say some positive affirmations (for example, “I love and approve of
myself,” “I have many strengths”).
Demonstrate happier, more confident body language.
Dress up and make yourself look nice.
Do something to treat yourself.
However, although quick mood-boosters help superficially, you can’t just
up the dosage to improve your core self-esteem, no more than swallowing
more painkillers will heal a broken wrist. You have to use them in
moderation. If you don’t, the techniques will be a waste of time or become
unhealthy habits. The methods above are harmless, but have diminishing
returns if you do them too often.
There are two other techniques that are fine in small doses but unhealthy
if taken too far. The first is comparing yourself to people who are worse off
than you and realizing you don’t have it so bad. Doing this frequently will
get you in the habit of tearing others down in order to feel better about
yourself. The second is seeking reassurance or compliments from others.
Overuse will make you needy and dependent on others to shore you up.
Increasing your self-confidence in particular social
situations
If you have solid overall self-esteem, it can trickle down into your
situational social confidence. The two don’t always go together, though.
Some people are very successful and confident at aspects of socializing, but
don’t think much of themselves deep down. Other people feel good about
themselves on the whole, but still feel anxious and out of their depth in
specific social situations.
Situational confidence comes in two flavors. When you’re situationally
confident, you’re feeling one or both of two mental states. The first is a
calm, logical knowledge that you have the ability to handle yourself in
those circumstances. The second is a bold, psyched-up feeling.
Feeling calmly confident about your capabilities
When you’re truly confident in your ability to succeed in a specific
situation, you know you can perform well the same way you know the sky
is blue. You have a well-tested skillset or some other reliable advantage.
Your certainty comes from a string of past successes. This kind of
confidence has to be earned.
When you feel confident in this way, you have a realistic sense of what
you’re capable of and believe your tools are good enough to complete the
job. You don’t necessarily think you’re the best in the world; you’re just as
good as you need to be. If you’ve only been playing tennis for three years,
you’d still feel calmly sure you could beat someone who’s never held a
racket. It doesn’t mean you never feel nervous or unsure of yourself going
into a situation. However, underneath those natural emotions is a current of
“I’ll be fine. I’ve done this sort of thing a million times before. It usually
works out. And when it doesn’t, I can bounce back.”
You can build this confidence in an area you’re weaker at through small
successes. If you’re a beginner, you can’t skip to having the assuredness of
an expert overnight. Instead, embrace your newbie status, learn the basics,
and then feel confident that you know them, and that you’ll know even
more if you keep working at it. For example, if you’re learning to make
conversation with people at meet-up events, you may realize you can’t have
a long, engaging discussion with everyone you talk to, but you can feel
confident that you’ve gotten the hang of introducing yourself and initiating
interactions.
Feeling psyched
In contrast to feeling calmly assured about your abilities, the confidence
that comes from feeling psyched is very emotion-based. When you’re
experiencing it, you feel charged up and notice how unusually confident
you are. When you’re certain you’ll do well, you feel dry, logical
confidence; if you know success is a given, there’s no need to get emotional
about it. Psyched-up confidence is more likely to show up ahead of events
where you’re not so sure of the outcome. An untested beginner could
experience psyched-up confidence, but so could a veteran going into an
unusually tough or high-stakes situation. It’s like your mind is trying to amp
you up so you can face the challenges ahead.
The big problem with this variety of confidence is that although it does
improve your courage and performance, it’s fleeting and unreliable. If it
always appeared when needed, that would be great, but it usually doesn’t
happen that way. There’s no consistent technique to bring out that psyched
feeling on command. However, you may occasionally have success with the
following methods:
trying to psych yourself up physically, maybe by listening to driving
music, jumping around, yelling, or pounding your chest
listening to a passionate motivational speech or giving yourself a pep
talk
joking around with people to try to get yourself in a loose, playful
mood
trying to reframe the situation so it will seem easier or lower-stakes
(for example, thinking of the situation as a potential learning
experience, not your one shot at making friends)
trying to find a piece of practical information that will make you
more likely to succeed, and therefore feel surer of yourself (for
example, a conversation topic that you know will go over well with
the crowd you’ll be meeting)
getting other people to pump up and encourage you
Even if these techniques work, they tend to have strong diminishing
returns. What fires you up the first time never seems to work as well again.
If a situation makes you unconfident, it makes you unconfident, and there’s
no foolproof short-term method to get around that.
Chasing psyched-up confidence often sidetracks people. They normally
feel unsure and skittish in a situation and don’t perform well in it, but every
so often, for whatever reason, they get charged up and do much better than
they normally would. They understandably begin to see that temporary
emotional state as the key to their success, and they think there’s no point in
trying unless they’re fired up. Because there’s no way to conjure this feeling
at will, they end up wasting their time and energy looking for that one
surefire psych-up technique. If you want to become more consistently
confident in an area, you have to put in the time and effort to build your
skills. If you do find yourself feeling psyched up, by all means take
advantage of it, but don’t depend on it.
A couple of disclaimers about the task of building
confidence
When you’re trying to build your confidence, whether it’s of the self-esteem
or situational variety, there are some things you should keep in mind:
Don’t feel you have to get your confidence to a super-high level before
you can work on anything else
Having confidence is undoubtedly useful. However, some people get
sidetracked while working on their social skills by thinking they should
solve their confidence issues first. You can do quite a lot to improve your
social prospects without having rock-solid confidence. By all means, work
on your self-esteem, but don’t put everything else on hold.
Having confidence isn’t the only thing you need to be socially successful
A lot of advice on self-confidence has the underlying message that having a
better opinion of yourself is the key to success. At times, being more selfconfident
will improve how you act and come across around people. On
other occasions, your success will depend more on having particular skills,
like knowing how to make appropriate contributions to a conversation.
When you have the ability or traits to get the job done, you often don’t need
to be especially confident. If you know how to organize a group outing, it
won’t matter if you’re filled with self-doubt while you make a plan and
invite everyone. Unless your insecurities are obvious and off-putting, they
won’t get in the way of your organizing efforts.
Your situational confidence can’t jump too far ahead of your actual
abilities
In that sense that social success is at least partially tied to confidence,
people sometimes think they can increase their interpersonal skills by
becoming as confident as possible first. That’s not possible because your
skills or previous track record and confidence in an area are tied together. If
you know your skills rate a two out of ten, you can’t make yourself feel
eight-out-of-ten confidence in your ability to perform. Think of it as if
you’re building two small towers side by side, and you can only add to the
height of one when you’re working from the top of the other.
There’s no quick or easy way to gain a lot of confidence
Sometimes when a person asks, “Can I just improve my self-confidence in
order to be better with people?” they not only want the two to be connected,
but they hope that gaining confidence is quicker and simpler than
improving their interpersonal skills; by focusing on confidence, they hope
to find a shortcut to changing their social situation. It doesn’t work that
way. Confidence has to grow slowly over time. Any attempt to increase it
quickly will only result in a short-lived psyched-up feeling. We’d all be
super-confident if all it took was reading a few inspirational quotes.
SECTION
2
Developing Your Conversations
Skills
In this section
Some general strategies for making conversation
Tips on how to succeed at the stages of a typical one-on-one
conversation
Advice on dealing with different types of conversation, such as group
discussions and mingling at parties
Three core skills that will improve your conversations: empathy,
listening, and understanding nonverbal communication
Suggestions on cultivating a few important broader personality traits
that will make you more enjoyable to be around
9
Getting a Basic Feel for Conversations
CONVERSATIONS TAKE WORK. Even people who are naturally outgoing and
seemingly can talk to anyone occasionally get tongue-tied. So if you don’t
feel comfortable making conversation, you’re not alone. Because they
require you to think on the spot, your conversations are where the skills part
of “social skills” really comes into play. How well your interactions go
depends on three factors:
1. How comfortable and confident you feel in them: If you’re anxious
and insecure (the topic of Section 1), that can interfere with your
conversations in all the ways outlined in Chapter 3. Shyness is
many people’s biggest obstacle to having good interactions. Their
conversations are relaxed and flowing when they speak to someone
they’re used to, but when they get intimidated or self-conscious,
their skills break down.
2. Your technical ability to make conversation: Technical ability
includes your capacity to come up with things to say, your level in
skills like listening and empathy, your body language, your
knowledge of appropriate topics for a given situation, and so on.
This section focuses on these skills and more.
3. Your overall personality, interests, values, and opinions: The
choices you make in your interactions flow out of who you are as a
person. You could be very comfortable around people and always
able to think of things to talk about, but if you’re abrasive and
condescending and have a bunch of offensive opinions, your
interactions aren’t going to go very well. The line between
conversation skills and personality traits is fuzzy (if you’re
argumentative, that’s a negative trait, but also a poor conversational
style). Chapters 21 – 23 touch on some personality traits.
When people have trouble making conversation, one of their biggest
complaints is that they “just don’t know what to talk about” or that they
“always run out of things to say.” This chapter gives you some broad
suggestions for keeping your interactions going.
A few reminders about social interactions
As you work on improving your conversation skills, keep these points in
mind:
You can’t make every interaction go well. You won’t have enough in
common with everyone you meet, and sometimes the other person
will be in a grouchy mood. On occasion, you’ll begin talking to
someone who’s initially unfriendly and win them over with your
rapport-building skills, but it’s not realistic to expect to do this every
time. Even if you became the most charismatic person in the world, a
percentage of your conversations would not go well because some
people would feel jealous or intimidated around you. You can’t win
them all.
There’s no single right way to make conversation. Every person you
talk to is different, and your conversations with them can go in any
number of directions and still be a success. When someone asks you
a question over coffee, it’s not a test where you have to figure out the
one “correct” response.
Advice on interacting with people has to be general by nature. No
book can tell you exactly what to say in every situation. You’ll need
to take the broad principles and fit them to the social culture and
specific interaction you’re in.
No matter what kind of conversation you find yourself having, the ideas
in the rest of this chapter should give you a better idea of what to say in
them. When you naturally get along with someone and the conversation
flows effortlessly, many of the processes below happen automatically.
Using them more deliberately will help you in the interactions where the
words don’t come as easily.
Clarify your goals for the conversation
If the average person was placed in the cockpit of a fighter jet and told to go
through the start-up sequence and take off as quickly as possible, they’d sit
there dumbly because they wouldn’t have the first idea of where to begin.
Some people go blank in conversations for the same reason. They find
themselves speaking to someone and know they need to “make good
conversation,” but they aren’t sure what to do beyond that. It’s much easier
to talk to people when you have a rough idea of where you should try to
take the interaction. If you find yourself blanking, you can quickly remind
yourself of one of the goals, and that should help you think of something to
say.
Goals of day-to-day socializing
If someone says they have trouble making conversation, they usually mean
they aren’t good at the kinds of day-to-day interactions that are social for
their own sake (if they have to give directions to their house, they’re fine in
that conversation). The quintessential example of this is having to make
friendly chit-chat at a cocktail party. These kinds of interactions have one or
more of the following broader unwritten goals:
Goal #1: Have an interaction that’s rewarding for everyone involved
A conversation that engages everyone might include discussing a movie
everyone is interested in, joking around about a series of silly topics,
connecting over a shared experience, exchanging insights about a
philosophical question, having a friendly debate about a political issue, or
just enjoying one another’s company for two minutes as you chat about
nothing in particular. That doesn’t mean every second has to be engrossing
for each person, just that overall everyone is getting something out of the
exchange. Sometimes you’ll give the other person an opportunity to discuss
a topic that’s a bit more interesting for them, and they’ll do the same for
you.
This all seems obvious, but if you have trouble with conversations, you
can forget they’re supposed to be enjoyable and only see them as verbal
obstacle courses. If your only concern is to keep an interaction going so you
don’t seem awkward, it can land you in discussions you don’t get much out
of (“Man, this topic is boring…but at least I haven’t caused any awkward
silences”). Don’t passively drift along in your conversations. It’s okay to
push them in a direction you think you and your partners will enjoy.
Goal #2: Learn about the other person and try to find common ground
This is more clearly a goal when you’ve first met someone, but even if
you’ve known someone forever, there’s always more to discover about each
other. Learning about someone shows your interest in getting to know them,
and it allows you to get a sense of how much you have in common and if
they could be compatible for a closer relationship. You’ll also tend to grow
that little bit closer to someone when you find out you have similarities.
Goal #3: Share things about yourself with the other person
You want to learn about the other person, but they also want to know what
you’re all about. You should share your interests, personality, sense of
humor, values, and what you’ve been up to lately. As long as you’re also
allowing the other person to contribute to the discussion, it’s not selfabsorbed
to reveal yourself this way. Your conversation partners want to
know what makes you tick.
Goal #4: Show you’re a reasonably friendly, sociable person
When you talk to someone, come across as if you like talking to them, not
as if you’re aloof and feel put upon for having to speak with them.
Here’s an example of how being aware of broad goals can guide your
conversations: Say you’re talking to a new student in your art class. If the
conversation hits a lull, you could think, “Okay, one general goal is to learn
about them. I’ll ask them what else they’re interested in aside from
drawing,” or “I can share something about myself. I’ll quickly explain how
I’ve felt about the class,” or “What would make for an interesting topic to
discuss? I’ll ask them if they’ve been to the new exhibit at the art gallery.
Maybe after that we can talk about what kind of art we each like.”
Aside from those general goals, many social conversations have more
specific goals. Here are a few examples:
If you know the person already, catch each other up on what you’ve
been up to since you last saw each other (for example, events in your
life, fun or interesting things you’ve done, current topics that are on
your mind).
If you run into a coworker in the break room, have a brief, pleasant
interaction to show you’re a friendly person and a team player.
Talk about a topic predetermined by the situation, like discussing
what else you’ve been reading before your book club meeting starts.
Tune in to what each person wants out of the interaction
Every individual brings their idiosyncratic goals to each conversation or to
smaller sections of it. For example, maybe they’re curious to hear the
details of how your job interview went, they want you to be impressed with
them as they recount their recent trip overseas, or they hope you’ll validate
their feelings as they tell you about a rough time they went through last
week. If you can tune in to their objectives, it gives you more information
about where you could steer the exchange. Chapter 16, which covers
empathy, goes into detail about how to take on other people’s perspectives.
Be aware of any personal goals you have that might harm the conversation
We sometimes want things out of conversations that serve our own needs,
but getting them would make the interaction less enjoyable for everyone
else. For example, “I want to make everyone feel dumber than me” or “I
want my jokes to get a bunch of laughs, and that’s more important than
what anyone else has to say.”
Another more innocuous personal goal to be wary of is “I want to keep
this conversation going as long as possible.” If you’re just getting the hang
of keeping interactions afloat, this is a reasonable thing to aim for, but it’s
not appropriate in every situation. Your social worth isn’t based on being
able to talk to anyone for the maximum length of time. If you met someone
you had nothing in common with, maybe you could have a long interaction
if you faked an interest in their hobbies and told them exactly what they
wanted to hear about everything. But after the exchange was over you
might look back and realize you go nothing out of it.
Go in with an overall approach for making
conversation
The approaches below often come naturally to good conversationalists. You
can use the same strategies more deliberately. Having a broad game plan
can help because it simplifies and clarifies what you have to think about,
gives you the confidence that comes from knowing you’re using a method
that works, and provides some reliable, simple starting material so you can
practice. It’s good to have several approaches ready to go, and if one
doesn’t work, you can try another. You can also switch up broad approaches
within a single conversation as it evolves. You don’t have to apply only one
strategy to every person or situation.
The broad conversation goals that were covered earlier in the chapter are
one way to give yourself some direction (“I’m going to ask about their
interests and try to find one we have in common,” “My grandpa is
interested to know what I’ve been up to lately, so I’ll focus on telling him
what’s been new in my life since I last saw him”). Here are some other
approaches you can use:
Approach #1: Be interested in and curious about other people, and
make it your goal to find out what’s fascinating and unique about them
This is the most popular general approach you’ll hear people mention when
it comes to making conversation. It comes up again and again, going back
to classic books on people skills like How to Win Friends and Influence
People. The idea is primarily to be someone who asks questions and listens
to the answers, which leads to focusing the discussion on the other person.
Your “mission” in the conversation is to discover what makes the other
person interesting.
You don’t need to only listen to or talk about the other person the entire
time; you should bring up things about yourself and share your own
opinions when relevant. Generally focus the conversation on your partner,
but not to the point where you share nothing about yourself and become a
forgettable nonentity that just helps other people talk.
The underlying assumption about this approach is that everyone’s favorite
subject is themselves, and that people like someone who takes a genuine
interest in them and the things they have to say. People also tend to feel
good about a conversation in which they can talk about aspects of
themselves that they’re proud of and passionate about. Another line you’ll
often hear in regard to this strategy is that you’ll be more successful taking
an interest in other people than you will be by trying to get them interested
in you.
This approach predisposes you to adopt a positive, friendly frame of
mind. Its basic premise implies that everyone is worth talking to if you dig
past any preconceptions you may have of them. And because you’re likely
to find something interesting about the other person if you look for it, it
ends up being a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Approach #2: Talk in terms of the other person’s interests
Focusing on the other person’s interests is similar to the approach above, in
that you’re mainly listening and the conversation is based around the other
person and things they like discussing. This approach is not exactly the
same. The approach above is more general and is about finding people’s
good traits, whatever they may be. This one is more about specifically
trying to find out what the other person is interested in talking about,
whether it’s a hobby or a life decision they’re wrestling with, and centering
the conversation on that. You take an interest in their interest, ask
thoughtful questions, and listen as they tell you about it.
The limitations of being an interested listener
Both of these listening / other-person-centric approaches can work very
well and are essential to have in your toolbox. At the same time, their
effectiveness is sometimes oversold. They’re not the perfect, one-size-fitsall
conversation cheat codes they can be portrayed as. Sometimes you’ll
run into people who
don’t want to do most of talking because they’re shy, private, have
been told it’s rude to go on about themselves, or are bored of
talking about their own lives;
want to learn about you instead;
like talking about their passions, but only with other knowledgeable
enthusiasts, not anyone they have to explain the basics to;
are self-absorbed and will use you as a prop that gives them
permission to go on about themselves;
are trying to use this strategy themselves and will be reluctant to
take the spotlight; or
will enjoy your interest and having a chance to talk about the things
they like, but won’t automatically want to befriend you just because
of it.
Also, you can’t use this approach as easily in group conversations
because they’re not about focusing on one person.
Approach #3: Figure out what topics you have an easy time talking
about, and then try to steer the conversation in that direction
Having a conversation about your own interests is considered a more selfcentered
approach. It’s generally thought of as better form to focus on the
other person or have your contributions be equal. However, this strategy
may help you organize your thoughts and simplify how you approach an
interaction. If you’re just starting to get the hang of conversation, you may
be most comfortable expounding on a topic in your comfort zone. In
reasonable doses, it’s perfectly fine to try to talk about the things you enjoy.
You just have to be sensitive to other people and take care not to bore them
or monopolize the air space.
Know how to ask good questions and make good
statements
To use a common analogy, having a conversation with someone is like
working with them to rally a tennis ball back and forth. When it’s your turn
to hit the ball, you don’t want to send them weak or difficult shots they have
to scramble to return. When it’s your turn to speak and you want to continue
the conversation, you have to say something that will give the other person
enough to work with. At the most basic level you can:
Ask them a question, which directly calls on them to contribute.
Make a statement of your own, which will hopefully lead them to
think of something they want to say in response.
Questions
Questions can ask for new information (“So what are you taking in
school?”, “How was the show last night?”) or ask for more details about
something the other person has said (“You’re studying business? What drew
you to that field?”, “No way! Then what did you do?”). Aside from
allowing you to get more information, they also show your interest in the
other person and let you direct where the conversation will go.
As much as you can, you want to ask open-ended questions rather than
easy-to-answer closed-ended ones. Open-ended questions require an answer
of a couple of sentences; closed-ended questions can be answered with one
or two words. Closed-ended questions can stall a conversation because the
other person may respond with only a yes or a no, or something like “It’s
good.” A quick example of an open vs. closed question would be asking
someone what they think of their college major (open), rather than asking if
they simply like it (closed).
It’s hardly a fatal error if you ask a close-ended question. Sometimes
you’ll want to know the answer to a question that’s simple to reply to, or it
will be all you can think to say at that moment. Just be aware that you may
not get a good answer and will need to have another contribution ready to
go (for example, “Did you have fun on vacation?”, “Yep.”, “Good to hear.
What would you say was the highlight?”).
Statements
A statement could be an answer to a question, an opinion, an observation,
some information, or sharing something relevant that happened to you. The
main guideline when making statements is that you want to say something
with enough substance or “jumping-off points” to provide your
conversation partner with plenty of ideas about what they could say next. If
you’re answering a question, provide enough details.
Rather than saying that you liked a movie, give a few reasons why. Rather
than quickly replying that your weekend was fun, mention something you
did. Let your interests, values, and personality show. You won’t always
know what to say, and it’s fine if you sometimes have to give short, sparse
answers. However, if you give too many, it puts too much pressure on the
other person to keep the interaction alive. This isn’t to say you need to go
on for a full minute every time it’s your turn to speak. You can offer your
partner plenty of jumping-off points in a meaningful sentence or two.
Mini-questions, statements, or facial expressions that encourage the
other person to keep talking
If the person is talking about something they’re interested in, you don’t
necessarily have to come up with an elaborate reply when they pause to let
you speak. You may just need to make a quick little utterance that tells
them, “I’m listening. Keep going,” or “Here’s my reaction to what you just
said. Continue.” Some examples are “Hm”, “Uh huh… uh huh…”, “Oh
yeah?”, “Go on…”, “Ha ha, no way…”, “Yep, that’s something he’d do.”
Sometimes you don’t even have to speak; you can just laugh, look sad, or
look surprised at the appropriate moment and let the person continue what
they were saying.
Mixing up questions and statements
In most conversations, you’ll want to use a mix of questions and statements.
If you ask someone question after question, it can create an interview or
interrogation dynamic or cause a lopsided exchange where one person feels
they’re doing all of the sharing about themselves while the other remains a
cipher. Sharing too many of your own statements may make you seem like
you’re not interested in the other person and their opinions, and simply
want someone to talk at. Even if your responses have substance, if you only
answer another person’s questions but never ask any of your own, it can put
too much pressure on them to keep driving the interaction forward. That too
can make you seem like you’re indifferent to learning anything about them.
Some types of discussions will naturally feature more questions or
statements. If you’re talking to someone about a mutual interest, you’ll tend
to make a lot of statements to each other as you share your opinions and
information. If you’re getting to know someone or listening and helping
them work through a tricky issue, you may mostly be asking questions
when it’s your turn to speak.
Get better at noticing the possible jumping-off points
in the statements people make
Not everything you say has to directly tie in to the sentence made right
before. However, if you pay attention to what the other person says, their
statements can give you a lot of ideas. For example, if someone says, “My
weekend at the cottage was fun. I went jet skiing for the first time,” some
possible jumping off points are:
Weekend: Talk about how your own weekend was. “Oh, that sounds
fun. I stayed in town and went to a concert this weekend.”
Cottage: “Oh cool. Was the cottage more isolated, or on a busier
lake? Whose cottage is it, your family’s or a friend’s?”
Jet skiing: “Wow, I’ve never done that. How’d you find it?” or “I
remember doing that as a kid. The newer models must be way more
fun. How was it?”
First time jet skiing: “I remember the first time I ever drove a boat
up at the cottage…”
There’s no single correct response in this example, so any of these
statements or questions, or other ones, could be valid ways to continue the
conversation. Sometimes people will set up obvious jumping-off points for
you because they have something they want to talk about, but don’t want to
launch right into it without gauging your interest. For example, they’ll say,
“Man, the weirdest thing happened to me at the music festival…” You just
have to say, “Oh yeah? What happened?” and they’ll tell you.
Ask the other person their thoughts on the question
or topic you were just talking about
You can’t build a whole conversation on this technique, but it’s simple to
use and can help you here and there if you’re at a loss for words. Its most
basic form is to ask someone the question they just asked you (for example,
after telling them about your hobbies, you ask what they do for fun). If you
give your opinion and observations on an issue first, then after you’re done,
you can ask them what their thoughts are.
Realize you have more to talk about than you may
think
People who have trouble with conversation sometimes say they have
nothing to talk about and they know they’re boring because all they do is
work or play video games. Everyone has more topics they can talk about
than they think. Even if most of your time is taken up by one activity, you
still watch the odd movie, catch bits of the news, or have funny little things
happen to you as you go about your day. You have your unique perspective
and opinions on all of them. You have thoughts on your dreams for the
future, your family, current events, larger philosophical questions, what it’s
like to live in your city, what type of cereal tastes the best, what cats are like
as pets, and on and on and on. Don’t unnecessarily dismiss an idea for
conversation with, “Well, sure, I have an opinion on that, but no one wants
to hear it, so it doesn’t count.” Any of them could potentially be interesting
in the right context.
Don’t filter yourself too much when trying to think of
something to say
Often when you feel like you can’t think of anything to say, there are
actually lots of possible contributions passing through your mind. But
instead of going with them, you nix them for one reason or another: “No, I
can’t say that. It’s too boring.” or “No, that’s too out of the blue.” Often this
thought process is quick enough that you won’t notice yourself doing it.
Instead of censoring yourself too much, just toss out some of the ideas
going through your head. It’s better to say something than nothing. Even if
you put something out there that didn’t get a stellar response, at least you
tried and did your part to keep the conversation going. There’s always a
chance to recover if something you say doesn’t lead anywhere.
Don’t fret about saying generic things
A lot of conversation advice tells you not to bore people with clichéd,
unoriginal topics. Sometimes recalling this point can cause you to freeze in
social situations. You’ll meet someone new and not say anything to them
because you think it’s a huge faux pas to say something uninspired, like
asking where they work. Don’t put too much pressure on yourself by
feeling that every statement that comes out of your mouth has to be
sparklingly original, insightful, and entertaining, or that every question you
ask has to get the other person thinking about things they’ve never thought
about before. If you watch friends hang out, you’ll see they often talk about
pretty humdrum topics. If someone enjoys another person’s company,
they’re more than happy to talk about day-to-day subjects with them.
If small talk makes you feel impatient, you may hesitate to bring up
anything reminiscent of it. If you’ve just met someone, it may be a good
play to ask them where they’re from or what they’re studying, but if you
find that kind of conversation boring, you may say nothing, and the
interaction might fizzle out. More on small talk coming up in Chapter 12.
Don’t fret about changing topics
Sometimes you’ll have something you want to say, but you’ll abandon it
because you can’t think of a smooth way to segue into it. If you listen to
friends talk, you’ll see they bring up new topics all the time. When one
conversation thread has come to an end, it’s normal to jump to something
unrelated. It’s okay to change the subject as long as the transition isn’t
completely random and jarring, and you haven’t cut the other person off
from a topic they wanted to stay on. If you do want to switch topics, follow
these pointers:
If the other person is expecting a reply, give them one first. If they
tell you about their winter holiday, comment on it or tell them about
something you did with your own time off.
Make a shift seem less abrupt by tacking on a phrase like, “Oh
yeah…”, “That reminds me…”, “Speaking of…”, “I’m not sure why,
but that makes me think of…”, or “This is going to sound random,
but…”.
If you pause for a few seconds before changing topics, it often
signals, “That subject is done, switching to something else.”
Pay attention and keep up with the conversation
going on around you
This one applies to group conversations. It’s always easier to come up with
things to talk about when you really focus on what everyone else is saying.
It’s more likely you’ll hear something that will trigger a contribution you
could make. However, some people have a tendency to zone out and
disappear into their heads. Group conversations can also be a bit annoying
to follow at times, like if many people are talking at once or if the
environment is loud. Sometimes it seems easier to give up and not devote
your full attention to what the others are saying. With practice, you can get
better at keeping focused during group conversations. If you tend to get
distracted by anxious thoughts, Chapters 5 and 6 have suggestions on
dealing with that.
Prepare some topics or statements ahead of time
A standard piece of conversation advice is, “Before you go to a party, it’s
always good to catch up on the news so you’ll have a few ready-to-go
topics prepared or you’ll have something to add if someone else brings
those stories up.” A similar suggestion is, “If you know you’ll get asked a
certain question a lot, it helps to have an interesting little blurb to give in
response.”
You can prepare for your interactions in a more general way by keeping a
few topics in mind that you can bring out whenever the discussion hits a
lull. This could be as simple as asking, “So has anyone seen any good
movies lately?” It’s hard to remember more than a handful of these
conversation starters though. There’s no need to try to memorize thirty
different lines you could use at a party. In the moment, you’ll probably
blank on most of them anyway, or get stuck going through the huge mental
list to pick out the best option. If you give yourself only three choices, it’s
easier to go with one of them.
A few longer-term approaches for having more things
to say in conversations
The suggestions above were more tactical and can be used right away. You
can also work over a longer period to develop your conversation skills and
give yourself more to talk about.
Have more experiences and develop your opinions
This chapter already argued that even if you think your life is sterile and
one-dimensional, you still have much more to say than you think. That said,
if you do the same things all the time, another way to have more to talk
about is… to get more to talk about. Try new hobbies. Visit new places. If
you find you don’t have an opinion to share on some important topic, then
do a little reading and develop one so you’re prepared the next time the
subject comes up. If you’re really busy, even a small new experience here
and there can go a long way. Eat at a new restaurant. Watch a few episodes
of a new show. Listen to a few songs by a new band. Spend half an hour on
a website about a subject you’re interested in but not familiar with. Don’t
put unrealistic expectations on yourself to gain a whole new colorful life in
a week. Just start small and let it add up.
Know facts and details about a range of topics
The more knowledge and experiences you have floating around in your
head, the easier it is to chat with people. The likelihood increases that they
could say something that will spark an interesting contribution from you.
It’s sometimes eerie how you can be reading about some seemingly obscure
new topic earlier in the day, and it will come up in conversation that very
evening.
This is a pragmatic piece of advice that you may not feel like using, but it
never hurts to be at least somewhat familiar with the things other people
tend to be interested in and are likely to bring up. Even if you can’t have an
in-depth conversation about a certain area, being able to share a little
factoid or ask an intelligent question about it can keep the interaction
flowing.
As practically useful as it is to have a lot of knowledge and experience, it
has its limits. First, it’s impossible to do and learn about everything.
Second, everyone has areas that they’re just not interested in, regardless of
how practical it would be to know about them (for example, some women
just don’t care about fashion trends). That’s fine. No one can be expected to
make perfect conversation about every subject on the planet.
Learn to relate to a wider variety of people
You may sometimes find it tricky to make conversation with people who
have different interests, priorities, and ways of looking at the world. At
times their differences will intrigue you, but you can just as easily find
yourself thinking, “I have nothing to say to this person. We don’t think alike
at all. We hardly have anything in common.” You may find you can relate to
these types of people better if you make an effort to put yourself in their
shoes. Genuinely try to get a sense of why they think the way they do and
like the things they like. Maybe try out some of the things they enjoy that
you’ve dismissed up until now. Even if you don’t share their exact
worldview, you may realize you have some common ground after all, and
they’re not the caricatures you originally thought they were. Chapter 16
goes into more detail about this kind of empathy.
Overcoming conversation stumbling blocks
Sometimes you may have a series of conversations, but you aren’t getting
good reactions from the people you’re trying to talk to, and you’re not sure
why. It’s hard to see outside yourself and get an objective sense of why you
might not be making the best impression on people. There are a few ways
things could be going wrong:
Reasons that lie with you
You’re not actually doing anything wrong at all, but you’re insecure
and seeing signs of rejection where there aren’t any. You then give up
too soon on interactions you “know” have gone south.
Your conversation and shyness management skills aren’t developed
enough yet, and your interactions are stilted.
You’re expecting too much from various conversation techniques and
think you just have to use them and everyone will instantly like you.
Your nonverbal communication is putting people off (see Chapter
19).
You make one of any number of possible mistakes when making
conversation (see Chapter 20).
Reasons that lie with the people you’re talking to
You’re trying to interact with people who wouldn’t naturally click
with someone like you.
You’re in a demographic that the people you’re trying to talk to will
unfairly dismiss (for example, if you have a Southeast Asian
background and you’re living in a small-minded mostly white town).
If you’re consistently not getting good responses from others, the best
thing you can do is ask a supportive person for some feedback on how you
come across. Finding someone to do this can be tough because many people
will be reluctant to be straightforward with you. They feel awkward about
possibly hurting your feelings or worry you’ll take their comments badly.
And you may not want to ask because it’s scary to willingly open yourself
up to criticism and risk hearing something that may make you feel bad
about yourself. This is another situation where a professional counselor can
be useful. They’ll be honest, and they’ll word their critique in a sensitive
and constructive way. They’re also an impartial stranger, so their feedback
will probably sting less than if it came from a friend or family member.
10
Dealing with Awkward Silences
REGARDLESS OF HOW CLOSELY you follow all of the conversation tips in this
section, eventually you’re going to face the dreaded awkward silence while
you’re trying to talk to someone. If you fear silences, you likely imagine
they’ll be really uncomfortable and embarrassing in the moment.
Furthermore, you may believe that if one happens, it “proves” you’re
incompetent in social situations. Nothing could be further from the truth.
Read on to find out why awkward silences happen and what you can do
about them.
Seeing why awkward silences occur
Not every conversational lull or silence is due to a mistake on someone’s
part. Don’t be too quick to blame yourself if the conversation hits a snag.
Sometimes these lulls occur naturally, simply due to what was being talked
about:
You and your conversation partner(s) may have come to the end of a
subject, and you both need time to figure out what to say next. When
some topics end, it’s fairly easy to think of the next direction to head
in. With others, no immediate follow-up springs to mind.
If someone makes a particularly profound or thought-provoking
point, everyone may want to pause and reflect on it for a moment.
Everyone may be in a somewhat tired, distracted, or laid-back mood
and decide all at once they just want to relax and not talk for a bit.
Knowing when silence is okay
Silence is acceptable in some situations, and it’s not necessary to try to fill
it. If you’ve just introduced yourself to someone at a party, you both hope
and expect that the conversation will flow easily. In other situations, it’s
natural to have quiet periods. Some cases are when you’re riding with
people in a car, bus, or plane; when you’re chilling with a friend and
watching a movie; when you’re sitting at the beach or around a campfire;
and when you’re on a hike. If everyone goes quiet, you shouldn’t consider
these awkward silences that must be overcome at all costs. In fact, in these
situations it’s often the wrong play to try to keep the conversation going
nonstop. It makes you look insecure and like you can’t handle a second of
peaceful reflection.
Handling a few seconds of silence with ease
Silences happen. It’s all about how you react to them. If you stay
comfortable and in control, you’ll send the message, to yourself and to
everyone else, that what’s happening is normal and not awkward at all. If
you keep your cool and apply one of the suggestions below, it won’t be long
before the conversation is back on track.
Short silences happen all the time between good friends. Because they’re
comfortable in each other’s company, they don’t stress about it and are
content when a few seconds of dead air happens. They may have as many
silences in their conversations as two people who just met, but they don’t
really notice them, and they don’t see the exchange as being awkward and
halting.
Don’t worry about bringing up a new subject
If a silence settles in, give yourself a few seconds to try to think of
something that will continue the current topic. If you can’t, maybe you
could go back to a dangling thread from earlier in the conversation (“So,
you were saying before that you were thinking of learning to knit?”). If
nothing comes to mind, you’ll have to come up with a new topic.
You may worry that it will seem clumsy to switch to a fresh topic so
abruptly or that your choice will be boring or that by changing the subject,
you’ll reveal you didn’t know how to keep the last thread going. It’s fine to
shift gears if the current subject has come to an end. It’s also all in the
delivery. If you change topics in an uncomfortable, stilted way, it might be
awkward. But if you speak as if taking the discussion in a new direction is
the most natural thing in the world, it won’t seem out of the ordinary.
Comment on the silence
When you comment on the silence, don’t say something like, “Wow…this
sure is uncomfortable. Can’t think of anything to say…nope…” That
usually makes the silence worse by drawing attention to it and putting
people on the spot. Depending on why the silence occurred, you can make a
casual observation about it before bringing up something new. Here are a
few examples:
If a lull settles in because everyone was kidding around and then one
person made a funny but very random joke, you could say, “Ha ha, I
guess there’s not much anyone can say to continue off from that.
Anyway…”
If everyone has exhausted a particular topic, you could comment,
“Um, looks like we’ve said everything we have to say about that.
Um… so did you hear…”
If you say something and it seems the other person can’t think of
anything to say in response, you could ease the silence with, “Ah, I
guess you haven’t thought about that. Oh, so the other week I…”
If someone makes a statement that everyone needs time to digest,
after a bit of silence you could say, “Yeah, that’s an interesting point.
My mind’s mulling over it right now… I guess thinking about it
more, I…”
Be open when you have nothing to contribute
Sometimes someone says something that gives you nothing to go on, and
you can’t think of anything to say in reply. For example, if you know or
care nothing about cars and someone tells you the McLaren MP4-12C’s
engine produces 592 bhp, odds are your mind is going to go, “Uhh….”
Rather than scrambling to try to come up with a relevant follow-up to their
statement, you can say what you’re thinking: “Ha, ha, sorry. I don’t know
much about that stuff.”
Try not to leave the conversation hanging there, though. Some people are
too quick to give up on a conversation when it turns to an area they don’t
have in common with the other person. Once you get your lack of
familiarity about the topic out in the open, you’ll often find a way to get the
interaction going again. Maybe you’ll decide to switch to a subject you can
both talk about, or you could take an interest in their interest and stay on the
current subject, but ask them to explain the basics and background details
more so you can follow along and relate to it better.
Be prepared for surprising statements
Sometimes you experience a loss for words when the other person says
something off-putting or unexpected. Imagine you’re talking to a seemingly
grounded, intelligent person, and then out of nowhere they say, “I think
fashion is super important. I don’t trust anyone who spends less than $2,000
a month on new clothes.” It would stun you into silence. If you were
thinking anything, it would probably be something like, “Wow…That is so
out of touch. I have no idea how to reply.” As a milder example, say you
ask someone what their favorite shows are and they reply they don’t watch
TV. You may not have a problem with that, but it wasn’t one of the answers
you were anticipating, and you may be unsure how to reply.
Knowing you may face unexpected statements can help you respond
better to them. Rather than beginning to panic because an awkward silence
may be imminent, you can use a few fall-back responses. You could quickly
acknowledge their opinion and change the subject. Or you could adopt a
curious stance and question them about it. If you don’t agree with them, you
could respectfully say so, assuming you don’t think you’ll get pulled into a
pointless, nasty argument.
Take the opportunity to exit the conversation
If you were planning on ending the conversation soon anyway, a quick
silence can provide the opportunity to get going. Before the lull goes on for
too long, take charge and say something like, “Anyway, I’ll let you get back
to what you were doing…” or “Anyway, it was good running into you. I’ll
catch you later…” Chapter 13 is all about ending conversations.
Even when you’re not intending to leave, in situations like parties and
networking events, there’s nothing stopping you from exiting a
conversation as soon as it starts feeling awkward by pretending you meant
for it to be quick all along. Be careful, though, because bailing from
conversations early too often can become a bad habit that reinforces
avoidance behavior and prevents you from practicing how to recover from a
lull and carry on.
11
Starting One-on-One Conversations
THIS IS THE FIRST OF SEVERAL CHAPTERS on how to navigate the stages of a
typical conversation. Of course, not every conversation will go through the
same progression like clockwork, but thinking in terms of stages helps you
know what’s likely to come next.
The first stage of a conversation is obviously to start it. Beginning
conversations, especially with someone they don’t know, makes many
people nervous. They worry that they’ll say the wrong thing and get
rejected, or that they won’t be able to think of anything to talk about and the
interaction will stall soon after it begins. When you’re comfortable
initiating interactions and handling their first few minutes, a lot more
options open up to you.
The two substages to starting conversations
The beginnings of conversations have two parts, which often flow into each
other.
The first is for one person to say something to the other to initiate the
interaction. This could be as simple as a “hey.” Sometimes the first step is
taken care of for you: The other person approaches you, you’re introduced
to each other, or your circumstances force you to start talking. If none of
those things happen, you’ll have to start the conversation yourself if you
want to chat with someone. An opening line may do nothing more than get
the other person’s attention and begin the interaction, so you’ll need to
follow up the opening with something else (introducing yourself is one
example). Other openers can potentially lead to a full conversation (for
example, going up to someone wearing a T-shirt of your favorite band and
asking how they liked the latest album).
The second substage is navigating the conversation’s first few, sometimes
uncertain, minutes. When you’re first talking to someone, you often don’t
know much about them or what you could talk about with each other.
Although at this point the usual conversation goals (like learning about the
other person and showing you’re a friendly, interested person) come into
play, your main priority is to find a topic you both have an easy, enjoyable
time discussing and settle into a comfortable groove. After that, you may
continue to talk for hours about any number of issues, or you may each
have to run after five minutes, but still leave the conversation feeling you
had a nice chat.
Again, this part will sometimes feel simple and you’ll start gabbing about
a mutually interesting subject right away. Your conversation starter may
lead to an area you and the other person have in common. Or after initiating
the conversation with another opening line, the first thing you think to ask
about after that hits the mark. It’s also possible someone else will introduce
you to each other and set you up (for example, “This is Alison. She’s
studying to be a pharmacist too”). If a good topic doesn’t fall into your lap,
you’ll have to look for one, and you may hit a dead end or two before
finding something that works.
Things to keep in mind about initiating a conversation
Technically, initiating a conversation is simple. As long as it’s not rude or
totally out of left field, the exact opening line you use isn’t that important.
How the other person is likely to respond to you and how well the ensuing
interaction goes will depend more on factors like whether the person you’re
talking to is in the mood to chat, what their initial impression of you is, how
compatible the two of you are, and how good each person’s conversation
skills are.
However, your nerves may mislead you into seeing the task as more tricky
and complicated than it is. Emotional reasoning may kick in and cause you
to think, “This feels hard, therefore it must actually be difficult and require
a lot of strategizing to find the perfect opener.” If you’re worried about
getting rejected or offending someone, you may also hold out hope for a
nonexistent magic line that will guarantee you won’t get a bad response.
Things to keep in mind about getting through the first few minutes of
conversation
There are good and bad sides to the first few minutes of an interaction. In
the Good column is the fact that they’re fairly predictable. It’s also pretty
easy to practice them. If you go to a big party or networking event, it
wouldn’t be unusual to chat with a dozen or more people over the evening.
On the downside, if you’re going to have trouble in a conversation, it’s
likely going to be in those first couple of minutes. There are two reasons for
this: First, if someone doesn’t feel like speaking to you or you don’t have
much to say to each other, that’s going to become clear quickly. The other
person won’t give you much to work with, or you’ll both struggle to find
something to talk about. Remember, there’s no way to ensure every
interaction you have will go well. Second, you’re usually feeling at your
most nervous and on the spot when you’re first talking to someone, and
anxiety can cause you or your conversation partner to stall. If you can get
past that point, the rest of the conversation is usually easier.
It’s great when you find an interesting subject to talk about right away, but
it’s not at all unusual for a conversation to be a little stilted in its opening
minutes. That’s no reason to panic. This awkwardness isn’t a sign that the
interaction won’t be enjoyable or that you have horrible people skills. It just
means that each person hasn’t found their footing yet. In a few minutes,
everyone may be feeling more comfortable and have found something fun
to talk about.
Sometimes a conversation you start may peter out soon after it begins.
Knowing this takes some of the pressure away. Every time you talk to
someone, realize that they may be preoccupied, have nothing in common
with you, or be too shy to think of anything to say. Also accept that
sometimes you just won’t be on your game and able to do your part to keep
the conversation moving. Have a plan for gracefully leaving a conversation
that isn’t going anywhere. Rather than panicking and blaming yourself,
keep your cool and move on. (Chapter 13 covers how to end conversations.)
General guidelines for starting conversations
The appropriate ways to initiate a conversation vary depending on the
situation you’re in. If you’re at a friend’s party, it’s expected that people
will talk to each other, and most of the guests are there to do just that. It’s
fine to start conversations in a more forward, familiar, casual way where
you act as if you’re already on good terms with everyone. In more formal
settings, like a career networking event, you should be a little more reserved
and mannered. Still be friendly, but don’t be overly casual or chummy right
off the bat.
Talking to strangers in public places during the day is on the other end of
the spectrum. Some people are open to talking, but others are going about
their day and have other priorities. Read their body language for clues about
how open they may be to interacting with you (see Chapter 18). If they
seem really preoccupied and closed off, it may be better to leave them
alone. You need to respect that they may initially be wary and not know
what you want from them or not be in the mood to talk. You may need to
get their attention with a smile or an “excuse me” first. Still be friendly, but
speak with them in a more pulled-back, noncommittal way to give them the
sense that you’ll back off if they don’t want to chat.
Know your city and country’s attitude about what’s considered acceptable
too. In some areas, people are constantly, cheerfully talking to each other in
grocery store lines, while in other places, the culture is “Don’t intrude on
anyone’s space.” If your culture is less talkative, it doesn’t mean you’ll
never be able to speak to anyone you don’t know. If you try, you just need
to be extra respectful and realize you won’t always get a warm response.
Public places where people go specifically to socialize, like nightclubs,
fall in between. You have implicit permission to try to strike up a
conversation with people you don’t know, and you can often be more
casual; however, you also have to respect that not everyone goes to those
places looking to chat with a bunch of strangers. If they don’t seem like
they want to talk and would rather stick with the friends they came with,
then move on.
Examples of types of conversation openers and early
things to talk about
The following pages list several ways to initiate a one-on-one conversation
and to try to find a good topic during its first few minutes. The two are
together because many lines can pull double duty. Always have at least a
few lines or topics ready to go. If you use one but the other person doesn’t
give you a response you can work with, be ready to try another.
Examples of many types of lines follow, but that’s mainly to show you
have lots of options. Don’t feel you have to memorize every one. When
you’re in a situation where you want to talk to someone, go with one of the
first lines that pop into your head because they could all work equally well.
If you want to prepare ahead of time, settle on around half a dozen
conversation starters that you’d feel comfortable using. In general, as you
get better at thinking on your feet, you’ll feel more comfortable using
whatever type of conversation starter you want. Even if the other person
doesn’t answer in an ideal way, you know you can follow up and maybe
recover the interaction.
Openers that will begin a conversation, but have to be followed up with
something else
The only time these openers won’t need to be followed up on is if the other
person replies with a comment that naturally leads to a conversation. You
can’t count on that though, and should have another opener ready to use.
Introduce yourself
Try something simple like, “Hey, I’m Stephen.” With new people, you don’t
always have to introduce yourself to begin speaking to them. You could
start the interaction another way, and if all goes well, after a while it will
feel natural to say, “Oh, I’m so-and-so, by the way. What’s your name?”
Ask them a simple question about the situation you’re in
For example, at a party you could ask them if they know the name of the
song that’s playing or if they can tell you what kind of sauce is being served
with the hors d’oeuvres. Of all the ways to start a conversation, this is the
one where people use white lies the most. They aren’t interested in the
answer and are just using the question as a pretense to talk. Some people
think they can only use this type of conversation starter because it seems
more spontaneous and natural. It also doesn’t put them at risk of rejection as
much because they have the face-saving explanation that they just wanted a
question answered. There’s no need to box yourself in by always needing a
believable excuse to speak to someone. When you’re chatting with people
for friendly reasons, it’s perfectly fine to start a conversation more directly.
Ask them to do something simple for you
For example, you could ask if they could save your chair while you get up
for a second, if they have a lighter, or if they want to exchange email
addresses so you can send each other your notes if one of you misses a
class.
Say “Hello” or “Hey” or “What’s up?” or “How’s it going?”
This is a common way to get a conversation rolling, and it often does the
job, but it can be confusing and cause the interaction to stall. The other
person may think you’re only greeting them, reply with something like,
“Hey, I’m good, thanks,” and move on. Using a “What’s up?”-type opener
works better in the following circumstances:
You have some follow-up questions or statements prepared if the
other person doesn’t reply with anything substantial.
The person looks friendly and like they want to talk to you. You
sense that if you begin with “Hey” or “What’s up?” they’ll give you a
more detailed response.
Neither of you is rushing somewhere else, and it’s clear that you can
both stick around and talk to each other. For example, if you catch a
coworker as they’re walking past you in the hall, they may take your
“Hey, what’s up?” simply as a greeting. However, if they’re sitting at
a table in the break room and you join them and say, “What’s up?”,
that sends the message that you want to have an actual conversation.
Lines that can be used to initiate a conversation or a few minutes in to
try to keep it going
Some lines serve double duty. You can use them to initiate a conversation,
or you can use them to keep a conversation going when it stalls or you
finish talking about a topic.
Ask questions that are relevant to the setting
You and others in a social setting generally have something in common;
otherwise you wouldn’t be at the same place at the same time. With that in
mind, ask an opening question that is built in to your common situation.
This lets you exchange basic background information about each other or
find out more about the setting you’re in. Here are some examples:
At a party: “How do you know everyone else here?”
At a gaming club: “What games are you playing these days?”,
“How long have you been playing?”
Upon joining a recreational sports team: “How long have you
been on the team?”, “Do you play any other sports?”
At a new class: “Is this course part of your major, or just an
elective?”, “I missed the first class. Did the prof hand out a course
outline?”
At a meet-up: “Is this your first time at one of these events?”
On your first day on the job: “How long have you been working
here?”, “What’s it like working here?”
While traveling: “How long have you been here? What cities were
you visiting before?”
At a dance club: “Do you know if this place is normally good on
this night?”
Comment on your shared situation
“Man, there are a ton of customers in here today.”
“Today’s class was pretty slow, huh?”
Make a statement about the other person or give them a compliment
“You seem like you’re really into this song.”
“I like your hat. Where did you get it?”
(To the host of a party) “Wow, you’ve got a cool movie collection.”
Lines that are more appropriate once you’ve already begun talking to
someone
These can be used as an opening line, but will seem too out of the blue
unless you already know the person or you’re in a context, like a small,
informal house party, where it’s okay to approach people in a familiar way.
Ask typical getting-to-know-you questions
“What kind of hobbies do you do in your spare time?”
“Have you done anything really fun recently?”
“What do you do for work?”
“What are you taking in school?”
“What do you think of (a popular interest you hope they share or a
news story everyone is talking about)?”
“Have you been able to travel this summer / winter?”
“Are you from here?” If they reply no, ask, “How long have you
lived in the area?”
“Do you have any kids?” If they say yes, ask follow-up questions.
“How old are they? How many? Girls or boys?”
“How do you know Martin?” or “You went to the same school as
Martin. Do you know Carmen and Justin?”
Ask a question or make a statement about an interesting outside topic
Question examples:
“Have you seen (popular new movie)? What did you think of it?”
“Did you read that article yesterday about…?
Statement examples:
“I’m thinking of seeing (popular new movie). I saw the trailer for it,
and it looks awesome…”
“I read a really interesting article the other day. It was saying that…”
Make a statement about yourself
“I’m so happy right now. I just handed in my last paper for this
semester.”
“So I think I finally found a job teaching English in the Japanese city
I want to visit.”
If you already know the person, ask for an update about something that’s
been happening in their life
“So how was your weekend out of town?”
“How’s your daughter doing? Has she gotten over her cold yet?”
Thoughts on asking more creative hypothetical questions
Some advice on starting conversations says you should avoid any standard
lines and ask only unique, engaging questions. This suggestion is overrated.
Sometimes it can work, but in your day-to-day life when you’re talking to
friends, coworkers, classmates, or friendly strangers at a party, saying more
typical stuff is okay. Many people like a bit of predictability at the start of
their conversations and may be caught off guard and draw a blank if you
ask them something like, “If you could turn into any animal, what would
you be?” Less is more when it comes to being creative in your
conversations. The odd unique question can be fun, but it comes off as a bit
random and gimmicky if you’re constantly asking strangers at a party things
like, “If there were no laws for a day, what would you do?”
How to respond if someone tries to start a conversation with you
If someone else has initiated an interaction and you’re open to speaking to
them, all you need to do is seem friendly and approachable. Use open,
cheerful body language to show you’re happy to talk (see Chapter 19). Give
a good, full response to whatever their opening question or statement is.
Even if it’s something you’ve heard a lot and are a bit bored to talk about,
still give a proper, amiable reply. Possibly end your reply by asking a
question of your own.
Be willing to take the lead to help get a new
conversation off the ground
Conversations sometimes die right away because each person is unsure how
to act, doesn’t want to seem too selfish or pushy, and is waiting for the other
to direct where the exchange goes. If you’re shy, directing the conversation
may not be something you’ll be comfortable with initially, but taking the
lead can come with practice and experience. Here’s how you can try to
direct the exchange:
Be the first to ask a getting-to-know-you question and pick the one
you think will work best (for example, choosing to ask about their
hobbies because you have a feeling you’ll have some in common and
they’ll feel comfortable with that subject).
Politely change the subject if you’re on a topic that doesn’t seem to
be going anywhere.
Say something to kick-start the exchange if it’s petering out. For
example, ask about their interests if talking about your jobs didn’t
lead anywhere.
Ask general questions and make broad statements that take the
discussion in that ever-important mutually interesting direction. (For
example, you ask someone about their summer, and they mention
working a part-time job, attending a wedding, and visiting Europe.
You have a lot to say about traveling, so you choose to ask them
about their trip or mention your trip to Spain.) It’s selfish to always
steer conversations to only what you want to talk about, but it’s okay
to do this occasionally, especially if it helps get or keep an interaction
going.
Do most of the talking until the other person gets more comfortable
(again, this is a more advanced skill). For example, you ask them
about their job, they don’t say much, and you get a sense they’re
feeling on the spot. Rather than ask them more questions, you bring
up your own job and tell a quick, funny story about something that
happened to you at work. That gives them time to collect themselves.
12
Having Deeper Conversations
WHEN TWO PEOPLE FIRST MEET, their conversation usually starts on safe,
surface-level topics, while the emotional tone stays neutral, or casual, fun,
and positive. Once they get more comfortable and familiar with each other,
they may click and start having a closer or deeper interactions. They may
start sharing more personal, intimate information or really explore a
philosophical subject. If you connect with someone, the discussion will
naturally tend to move in a deeper direction, but this isn’t to say you need to
try to force all of your interactions along a lockstep template. Sometimes
they’re just as rewarding if they stay at a light-hearted, superficial level.
This chapter covers various ways conversations can feel “deeper”—by
moving past small talk, connecting, opening up to each other, and
discussing more intellectual topics. When you are able to comfortably have
deeper, more intimate conversations, your interactions with people can
become even more rewarding.
Moving past small talk
When you’re first talking to someone, you’ll often cover general, well-worn
topics like your career and education. Asking and answering common
questions sometimes has a rote, uninspired feeling to it. This is one type of
the dreaded small talk that many people say they dislike. In a perfect world,
we’d never have to do it, but small talk serves some purposes:
Routine questions are a reliable way to get a conversation going.
They let each person cast around for a subject that’s more engaging
for both of them. A few lines of questioning may be repetitive and go
nowhere, but the next one might be interesting.
Standard chitchat helps ease your nerves when you’re most likely to
feel anxious. It gives you some safe, predictable, low-mental-energy
topics to draw on.
Small talk gives you a platform to show what kind of person you are,
aside from the things you like to discuss. As you spend a few minutes
covering familiar ground with someone, you can demonstrate that
you’re warm, confident, and glad to talk to them.
Many people expect to start a conversation with some neutral small
talk, so if you try too hard to barrel past it, you may seem like you
lack social savvy.
Whether a conversation feels like small talk also depends on its context. If
you’re interested in getting to know someone, you usually won’t have a
problem telling them about what you do for work or where you grew up.
However, if you’re sure the relationship is never going to go anywhere, like
if you’re talking to a stranger in line at the bank, then the same topics can
feel forced and like you’re pointlessly going through the motions. You’ll
also tend to lose patience with any topic that comes up over and over in a
short time (for example, being asked what you’re taking in college during a
family reunion).
Talking about unexciting, trivial topics
The term “small talk” also refers to conversations about mundane, trivial
topics like the weather, often with someone you already know, at least
casually. Many people aren’t enthusiastic about this either and wish they
could go into deeper, more meaningful subjects. This type of small talk also
has some justifications:
It allows you to socialize with people for its own sake, show your
interest in them, and maintain your relationship.
Often it lets you exchange pleasantries in situations where you don’t
have time to have a more intense conversation or the environment
isn’t conducive to it. If you run into a coworker in the parking lot,
you want to acknowledge them and show you’re friendly, but you
may have only a minute before you have to head home. Some quick
talk about the local news is better than nothing.
It can keep relationships primed for more substantial socializing
down the road. Maybe you make small talk with a neighbor in your
dorm when you run into each other while getting your mail. Because
you’ve been casually friendly to each other all semester, it seems
natural to one day invite them to a party where you can get to know
them better.
Sometimes people truly want to chat about fluffy topics. We can’t
always be in the mood to talk about subjects like whether free will
truly exists.
Ways to move past routine small talk
Small talk is always going to be a part of conversations. The way out of it is
through it. If you refuse to engage in it because it makes you feel bored or
impatient, many of your interactions will never get off the ground, and then
you’ll surely miss out on the possibility of having a deeper exchange. If you
play along and know how to handle small talk, it shouldn’t take more than a
few minutes to move into more interesting territory. Here’s what you can do
to help the process be faster and less painful:
Try to tap into the underlying friendly intent of the other person’s
communication, rather than the surface content. Realize they’re
trying to connect with you, not annoy you.
Try not to simply see small talk as a deal breaker or an ordeal to
endure. Reframe it as the opening round of a potentially good
conversation. Think, “If I have to do this, I may as well use it to set
up the conversation to go in an enjoyable direction.”
Accept that even if you try to make the best of it, not every moment
of every conversation is going to be fascinating for you. Sometimes
it’s necessary to get through those boring bits because it helps you
meet other goals, like you want to be friendly, or the other person is
enthusiastic about the topic and you want to let them share it with
you.
Whatever the other person says, even if you’ve heard it a million
times before, treat it like a legitimate contribution, and try to answer
with enough substance and jumping-off points to better topics. If they
mention the weather, rather than thinking, “Ugh, do I have to talk
about this?” and then answering with a flat “Yep… sure is nice out,”
you could cheerfully say, “Yeah, it’s really warm out. I’m planning
on going on a hike later today. How about you? Have any outdoorsy
plans this weekend?”
As soon as the other person mentions anything semi-interesting, grab
on to that and use it to move away from the routine exchange. For
example, if you ask them what they do for fun, and they say they like
watching movies, ask them which ones they’ve seen recently and
what they thought of them, or make a comment on a good film
you’ve seen yourself.
By using these strategies, you’ll hit on a more mentally stimulating
subject before long. If you keep trying but don’t find anything more
substantial to say to each other, take that as a sign that this particular
conversation may not be destined to go to a deeper level.
Connecting in conversations
Conversations feel closer when you connect with the other person. It’s hard
to describe what connecting with someone means, but you’ll know it when
it happens. It’s a combination of several things:
generally feeling you like someone and sensing they feel the same
way;
bonding with them because you share an important commonality you
can’t find in just anyone; and
seeing them as an ally or teammate, not a threat or competition.
You may connect with someone for many reasons: you both share a dry,
sarcastic sense of humor; you’re both going through a tough graduate
program; you both had self-involved parents; or you share political values
that are rare in your area. Sometimes you’ll connect soon after you meet,
but it’s also possible to know someone for a while and only really click
once you’ve learned a lot about each other. A connection may lead to
nothing more than a warm, fuzzy feeling you share with a stranger you chat
with on the bus for a few minutes, but it’s often a sign that a closer
friendship could develop.
Who we connect with is unpredictable. Sometimes you’ll meet someone
who’s a perfect match for you on paper, but they’ll rub you the wrong way,
for a reason you can’t put your finger on. Sometimes you’ll meet someone
who’s very different from you on the surface, but you each recognize
there’s some indefinable commonality in how you approach the world, and
you’ll get along right away.
Encouraging connections
People who aren’t where they want to be socially sometimes complain that
they can’t seem to connect with anyone. They make an effort to meet
people and sometimes manage to carry on longer conversations, but they
never click with anyone while they’re talking to them. There isn’t a way to
create connections at will. You’re not going to have enough in common
with everyone. However, you can work on certain things that can increase
the chances of possible connections happening:
Have your basic conversation skills and self-presentation at a
reasonable level. A connection will never have a chance to develop
if people write you off before talking to you or you can’t keep an
interaction going with them.
Actually want to get to know and connect with people. Don’t just
see others as puzzles to solve or props you can use to feel satisfied
with yourself when you make a joke or share a clever fact.
Have at least a little in common with the people you’re talking to.
People sometimes never seem to connect with anyone because
they’re an outlier in their community and don’t have much shared
ground with the individuals they usually meet. If they found and
talked to more people in their niche, the connections would come a
lot more easily.
Draw attention to any unique commonalities you share with the
other person. For example, “You like running? Me too. I’m the only
one of my friends who’s into it. They all think I’m crazy for jogging
for an hour before I go to work.” Pointing out a similarity or two you
share with someone isn’t a guarantee they’ll suddenly like you, but
it’s better to let them know about these things than not.
Be comfortable letting people know you like them. Get used to
telling new friends you find them interesting to talk to or letting
yourself show a warm smile when you see them.
Be comfortable with self-disclosure. People often connect over
aspects of themselves that they don’t share with just anyone. It is
possible to connect over a safer topic, like having the same favorite
band, but you’ll give yourself more opportunities to find a connection
if certain subjects aren’t off limits. The next section has advice on
how and when to self-disclose appropriately.
Finding Value in Self-Disclosure
One significant way to take a conversation to deeper territory is to exchange
information that’s more personal. As two people get to know each other,
they’ll stop talking only about safe, superficial topics and slowly start
sharing more of their vulnerabilities, blemishes, and “true selves.”
Safe, surface-level topics include your job and education; your living
situation; your hobbies and interests; your noncontroversial observations,
opinions, and humor, who you’re friends with; your family makeup; and
your goals and plans for the future. People are generally comfortable
sharing this information with anyone.
Somewhat personal topics include your milder insecurities, flaws, and
doubts; your somewhat odder quirks; your mildly embarrassing or slightly
emotionally heavy past experiences; your somewhat more controversial
thoughts and humor; and your less conventional, more ambitious future
goals. Because these details aren’t overly damaging or private, most people
are fine sharing them with someone who seems at least somewhat accepting
and trustworthy. They may get to this point in a conversation within a few
minutes.
Very personal topics include your deeper, more serious insecurities,
flaws, and doubts; past experiences that you’re very ashamed of, which
most people wouldn’t understand and which are quite emotionally heavy to
talk about; and your opinions that are very controversial. In their day-to-day
lives, most people only share these secrets with a select handful of very
close, trustworthy friends. However, they may share a specific, highly
private secret earlier than usual if they sense the other person has a similar
one and won’t judge them for it.
Overall, disclosing your emotions is seen as more vulnerable and
revealing than sharing factual information. For example, telling someone
that being constantly criticized by your parents made you feel sad and
worthless will create more intimacy than just mentioning your mom was
hard on you.
Seeing the balance in self-disclosure
As they open up to each other, people start with milder disclosures, and if
they’re met with acceptance and understanding, they gradually move on to
bigger ones. The expectation is that if the person you’re talking to reveals
something about themselves, you’ll match them and disclose something
similar (for example, they describe how they were really stressed out during
their last year of college. You didn’t find college that stressful, but share
how you had a tough time adjusting to your first real-world job). If
someone shares with you and you don’t disclose in kind, it disrupts the
process of deepening the relationship. The person who opened up may feel
unfulfilled, rebuffed, and perhaps a little unfairly exposed. If someone
shares too many times and doesn’t get anything back in return, they may
decide they’ve hit a limit on how close that friendship can get.
Self-disclosure fosters intimacy, but sharing too much too soon puts
people off. It puts them in an awkward spot. It’s emotional work to take in a
person’s secrets and problems and be supportive in response. If someone
barely knows you, they may not be ready to do that work yet, but feel
obligated because you sprung it on them. Many people see early
oversharing as a red flag that someone will be needy and draining in the
relationship. It also communicates that you lack the common sense to be
choosy about whom you share your private life with.
That’s not to say you’re always obligated to reciprocate when someone
self-discloses to you. Maybe you’re fine keeping them as a more surfacelevel
friend or professional colleague. Maybe you’ve just met them, and
they showed poor judgment by spilling their heaviest secrets too soon, and
there’s no way you’re doing the same. Maybe you’re particularly guarded
about that one topic, but are fine opening up about other ones. Overall,
though, if you’ve been getting to know someone, you’re hitting it off, and
they share a somewhat personal detail about themselves, you should selfdisclose
back.
Being overly guarded and secretive
Oversharing is a faux pas, but some shyer, less secure people lean in the
opposite direction and are guarded and secretive beyond a regular, sensible
level. Recognize any of these?
You see your social issues, like a lack of friends or dating experience,
as shameful failures that you must hide at all costs.
In more extreme cases, you think everything about you is boring or
“wrong” and would get a bad response if it came out. You may be
reluctant to talk about safe, surface-level subjects like what kind of
music you like.
You’re on edge in conversations because you can never be sure when
those topics may come up and your secrets may inadvertently be
outed.
You’re extra nervous in situations where your feared subjects are
more likely to come up, like if everyone’s drinking, getting loosetongued,
and talking about their love lives.
You get touchy and defensive when people ask you innocuous
questions related to your secrets (for example, “What are your friends
up to this weekend?”).
You use a variety of strategies to avoid sharing anything about your
secret: changing the subject; giving vague, evasive answers; straightup
lying; hanging back in groups and not contributing; shifting the
attention to someone else; or finding ways to leave the conversation
just as you’re about to be put on the spot.
Being overly guarded, for whatever reason, is a self-defeating strategy.
It’s stressful to carry around a bunch of supposedly shameful secrets and
worry about what will happen if someone finds out about them. Ironically,
secretiveness can create more problems than it helps avoid. If you have a
secret, no one may think it’s a big deal if they find out what it is, but they
won’t form the best impression of you if you’re always closed-off and
cagey. Their imagination may run wild and assume something worse about
you than what you’re actually hiding. Or they may simply think you’re not
interested in being friends with them when you continually rebuff their
attempts to grow closer.
How to become less guarded and open up to people
You can find ways to be less guarded and more open with people. First,
change your attitude about what it means to reveal your flaws. If you’re
guarded, you probably believe that others will reject you if they learn about
your weaknesses. Similarly, you may think that the way to be liked is to
come across as flawless and impressive. Actually, the opposite is true.
When you reveal your vulnerabilities and rough edges, you seem
endearingly human. When you act like you have no flaws, you become
distant and unrelatable. It’s cloying when someone seems too perfect and
together.
Many secrets are only shameful and embarrassing if you feel they are.
Maybe you don’t have many friends at the moment. You could believe it’s a
sign you’re a loser and dread being outed. Or you could adopt the
perspective that being lonely isn’t fun, but it happens to many people from
time to time, and you’re not defective just because you find it hard to meet
people at the moment. Being at ease with your flaws creates a kind of selffulfilling
prophecy. If you tell someone about your vulnerabilities and
display a calm, self-assured attitude about them, they’ll often respond to
your lead and feel they’re fine as well.
The best thing to do is open up to trusted people and see that it’s not so
bad. You’ll often get a positive response, and you can handle it if the odd
person acts like a jerk or takes it badly.
Start by making milder disclosures to strangers or people like therapists or
support-line workers who have to hold the information in confidence.
Slowly work up to sharing bigger pieces of yourself with people who are
more important to you. You don’t want to become an open book to
everyone on the planet; you just want to be able to self-disclose to the same
degree most people can.
If one big secret is holding you back socially, consider getting it out in the
open (for example, if you have trouble making friends because you’re
worried about everyone learning you’ve never dated anyone). Sharing the
secret will take a huge weight off your shoulders, and more pragmatically, if
people know you’re struggling with the issue, they may be able to offer
some practical help. You don’t have to share it with everyone straight off
the bat, but if the topic comes up, don’t steer clear of it. Again, ease into
things by telling the secret to people you’re comfortable with and go from
there.
How to have more intellectual, philosophical
conversations
People also think of conversations as being “deep” when they go into depth
on more cerebral or thought-provoking topics. A common complaint from
more intellectual types is that they have a hard time getting people to have
these kinds of interesting, meaningful conversations. They don’t need to
have deep, philosophical discussions all the time, but they start to feel
frustrated and unfulfilled if they don’t have any at all.
Unfortunately, there’s no way have intellectual conversations on
command. Some people are just more inclined toward them than others, and
it’s a trait that’s not always connected to the factors you think it would be
(you can meet PhDs who are surprisingly vacuous and factory workers who
love to wax philosophical). All you can do is try to take your interactions in
an intellectually deeper direction by bringing up the more cerebral ideas or
topics you want to talk about. After that, it all depends on whether anyone
else bites. With some people, if you mention the unemployment rate, it
won’t be long before you’re both speculating about what a post-scarcity
society would look like. With others, you’ll just get some silence and a
shrug before they change the topic.
If you want to have more brainy conversations, the easiest way to do that
is to find some similarly minded friends. It’s really the same with any
interest. If you love talking about beekeeping, you can’t expect everyone to
care, and the simplest way to have more satisfying discussions about the
topic is to find other beekeepers.
13
Ending Conversations
EVERY CONVERSATION has to come to an end eventually. Often it’s easy
enough to part ways, but sometimes you’ll feel more unsure about how to
wind down the interaction. This chapter gives you some options for doing
that. As with the other stages, you’ll feel more confident going into your
conversations when you know you can end them smoothly.
Ending a conversation is a pretty straightforward skill, and once you have
an idea of what to do, it’s easy to put the concepts into practice. This
chapter may also have the side effect of illustrating various ways that
someone might to be trying to end a conversation with you, so you’ll know
if it’s time to gracefully let them go.
Considering time limits to conversations
A general principle first: You can make ending many of your conversations
a lot simpler if you go into them with an understanding of approximately
how long you can talk so you can smoothly wind them down when the time
comes. Many conversations are open-ended in length, but in the following
situations, the other person may need to get going after about five minutes.
They may want to talk longer, but it’s always good to be considerate of their
time:
You run into a friend who’s in the middle of getting groceries.
You’re chatting to someone at work while you’re both grabbing
coffee from the kitchen.
You’ve called someone to quickly set up plans with them.
You’re chatting to someone at a party or networking event where
everyone is doing a lot of circulating and mingling.
You’re sitting next to an acquaintance on a bus, who may want to get
back to their book or headphones after catching up quickly.
It’s okay to end a conversation quickly and cleanly
Sometimes people feel that they have to give a big, formal good-bye every
time they stop talking to someone. Mostly this isn’t called for, and you can
finish the conversation in a to-the-point, casual way. Dragging out the end
of the conversation can make it feel more awkward.
Methods of ending conversations
If you’d like to see or keep in touch with the person you’ve been talking to,
you can use one of these approaches and exchange contact info, make
future plans, and maybe promise to drop them a line in a few days.
Wrap it up without any window dressing
It’s often fine to just pleasantly say you’ve got to go without any
explanation, especially if you know the person already. They’ll understand
you have things you need to do and won’t be offended.
“I gotta run. Good talking to you.”
“All right” (to agree with what they just said). “Anyway, take it easy,
man” (as you’re heading off).
(Speaking on the phone) “Well, I’m gonna go. I’ll talk to you later.”
Say, “Anyway, I’ll let you get back to it…” if they were in the middle of
something
“Anyway, it was good seeing you. I’ll let you get back to your
shopping.”
“Anyway, I’ll talk to you more later. I’ll let you get back to your
work.”
You can make up something for the other person to get back to. Like if
you’re texting with someone on a Sunday evening, you could say, “Well,
I’ll let you get back to getting ready for work tomorrow” or “I’m sure you
want to relax a bit before you go to sleep. I’ll let you go.”
Use a reason, made up or not, for why you have to leave the
conversation
Day to day
“It was good running into you. I have to finish this shopping before I
pick up my kids.”
“Sorry I can’t talk longer. I’m actually on my way to meet my friend
for coffee.”
“Let’s talk more at lunch. I need to finish up this presentation before
eleven o’clock.”
At parties, bars, or networking events
“I’ve got to go find my friends.”
“I’m going to go grab another drink.”
“If you’ll excuse me, I just saw someone I’ve been meaning to catch
up with.”
“I just have to head to the bathroom. I’ll run into you later maybe.”
“I just got here. I’m going to look around a bit more. I’ll see you in a
bit.”
Make a statement to summarize and wrap up the conversation, then
say you have to go
“Yeah, that movie’s going to be wicked. I’m really looking forward
to it. Anyway, I should get going…”
“Wow, a lot’s been happening in our families, huh? We’ll have to
catch up about it more soon… I just noticed my friends have arrived.
I’m going to say hi to them.”
Use signals that show you’re ready to end the conversation
While still being friendly and polite, you can start adjusting your body
language (more on that in Chapter 19) and your actions to indicate to the
other person that it’s time for them to finish up the discussion or that you’re
about to end it soon yourself. The idea isn’t to be passive and put
responsibility for ending the interaction on them; it’s just to give them a
heads-up. You could try one of the following tactics:
Stand up if you’ve been sitting down.
Start to give quicker, shorter responses: “Yep, yep, yep. Totally.
Anyway, I should get going…”
Look more frequently at the thing you need to get back to, for
example, the direction you were walking in, the photocopier you
needed to use before you started chatting to a coworker.
Start angling your body away from them and perhaps toward
something you need to get back to.
If the conversation still hasn’t wound down, actually get back to the
thing you needed to do. For example, start to photocopy your
documents or resume shopping.
If you were about to leave and a conversation is holding you up,
signal you’re about to go by gathering up belongings like your coat,
car keys, sunglasses, and purse.
Introduce the person to someone else, or bring them along as you join
another conversation
This is a party tactic. If you join another discussion, the conversation you
were having with the original person naturally dissolves. If you do the
introduction move, be subtle and genuine about pulling it off. If you do it in
an insincere, exaggerated way, the other person will be able to tell you’re
blowing them off by trying to foist them on someone else.
Get back to your book, music, phone, laptop, or video game
If you’re talking to someone on a bus, subway, or plane, you may not feel
like speaking the entire time you’re forced to sit near each other. In these
cases, it’s always handy to have something else you can turn your attention
to. To end the conversation, you could say, “Well, I’m just gonna get back
to my book now,” or you could wait for a pause, not make any effort to fill
it, and then open a school assignment on your laptop. The other person
should figure out your intentions. On a bus or plane, you can always
pretend to take a nap as well.
You can leave some group discussions without saying much of anything
If you’re talking with a group at a party and after a few minutes you decide
you want to keep circulating, you can often just walk away. It’s understood
that people are going to drop in and out of different discussions. You don’t
need to slink away silently. You can quietly indicate you’re leaving with a
quick little nod or wave. You can sometimes do the same thing at your job.
If a bunch of coworkers are sitting around on break at a table where many
people are coming and going, you can join them for a bit, then just get up
when you have to go back to work. You could say good-bye, and often you
will, but they won’t think it’s rude if you don’t. They know they’ll see you
soon anyway.
Decoding those hard-to-read niceties that people sometimes use as
they’re wrapping up a conversation
One thing that confuses a lot of people is when they’re talking to someone
and as they’re leaving, the person says something like, “We’ll talk soon,” or
“I’ll get back to you about it later,” or “Let’s do lunch.” Sometimes they
literally mean these things, and sometimes they’re just saying them as
niceties. They don’t necessarily dislike you and are being deceptive to try to
escape. They just want to end the conversation in a friendly way, and
bringing up the possibility of future plans is a way to do that.
There’s no reliable way to decipher what someone’s intentions are here.
You have to get a feel for what each person’s style is and whether they tend
to actually mean it when they say these things. Also, if someone ends a
conversation by saying, “Let’s have coffee soon,” and you’re interested but
not sure if they really mean it, it doesn’t do any harm to follow up and try to
get a better sense of where they stand.
Extracting yourself from an uninteresting but determined conversation
partner
If you find yourself speaking to someone who’s boring you, you can usually
use one of the above approaches to politely end the conversation.
Sometimes it’s not that easy. The worst-case scenario is when you’re with
someone who can seemingly talk at you forever, isn’t being sensitive to
your time or your nonverbal indications of losing interest or needing to go,
and can smoothly transition from one subject to the next, so there’s no
natural break between topics where you can say you have to run.
With these people, you need to be more assertive in interrupting them so
you can announce you need to get going. If you can, wait for even the
smallest pause in their story or explanation, then jump on your chance. This
moment may not always come, and sometimes you’ll have to straight out
cut them off (for example, “Sorry, I know you’re in the middle of your
story, but I have to go catch up with my friend”). They may get a bit
offended, but you don’t have anything to feel bad about. They forced your
hand through their own mistakes.
14
Navigating Group Conversations
YOU’RE IN GOOD COMPANY if you’re fine in one-on-one conversations but
clam up or feel overwhelmed when more people are in the mix. Group
conversations are different than one-on-one interactions in the following
ways:
Rather than two people sending communication back and forth to
each other, each person in the group throws in their contribution for
everyone else’s benefit. That means many one-on-one conversation
styles don’t work as well. You can’t ignore everyone else to lock onto
one person and listen as they tell you about the graphic novel they’re
working on. You have to be able to chip in to the larger discussion.
Their energy levels can vary because there are more people to
influence it. One-on-one conversations are mostly conducted at a
low-key level, but group discussions can range from calm and
orderly to excited and rowdy.
There’s less pressure on you to keep the interaction alive because if
you don’t have something to say, someone else will. Unless every
member in the group is feeling shy, a group conversation will keep
going. The challenge becomes contributing enough. If you don’t talk
for a while, the interaction won’t end, but you may be left sitting
unhappily on the side or get the dreaded “Why are you so quiet?”
Speaking in groups, such as if everyone’s listening as you tell a funny
story, can sometimes feel like you’re giving a mini-performance
because so many pairs of eyes are focused on you. When you’re
joking around or arguing a point, you may also have the sense that
you have to play for the crowd.
They can continually shift back and forth between a true group
discussion, where everyone is talking together, and several smaller
subconversations.
This chapter tells you what you need to know to handle group
conversations. It lists some ways to join group discussions, be more
talkative in them, and hold your own and not get too annoyed when they get
more hectic and energetic.
Ways to join group conversations
Chapter 11 covered various ways to start conversations. A lot of what was
said there applies here as well, like how your exact opening line is less
important than your ability to get along with everyone once you’re speaking
to them. One new thing to keep in mind is that you should roughly try to
match the group’s energy level. If you’re at a party and see a group that’s
boisterous and joking around, it won’t work too well if you try to engage
them in a calm, dry manner. Similarly, a subdued group that’s talking about
world affairs won’t respond as well to an amped-up approach.
Try to read how open the group is to being approached (see Chapter 18).
If a group is standing way off to the side, is formed in a tight circle, and
seems to be having an intense, private conversation, it may be best to leave
them alone.
You may worry that if the group isn’t receptive, you’ll be rejected in a
harsh, humiliating way. Usually this doesn’t happen, especially if you were
just approaching them to be friendly and not aggressively hitting on anyone.
Usually all that will happen is they’ll respond to you in a token,
noncommittal manner, then resume talking to each other and leave you
standing on the sidelines. They might turn away from you or tighten their
circle to box you out. At that point, you can quietly move on. It’s a bit
awkward when it happens, but hardly a scathing cut-down. To an outside
viewer, it doesn’t look like much happened.
Of course, this can be confused with when the group allows you to join
but doesn’t make a ton of effort to include you in the conversation because
they expect you to use your own initiative. If you make several attempts to
contribute and they make no effort to engage you, then it’s likely they don’t
feel like speaking to you.
Introduce yourself to everyone
At parties, mixers, or networking events, it’s okay to simply go up to a
group and introduce yourself. A “Hey, how’s it going, everyone? I’m ____”
is all you need. After you introduce yourself, you could ask a standard
discussion-promoting question like, “How do you all know the host?” or
“Are you all criminology students too?” To join the conversation but also
not interrupt too much, you can quickly give your name and then say,
“Anyway, what you were guys talking about?” to get it back on track.
Sidle up to the group, listen to the conversation for a bit, and then
make a contribution when it’s appropriate
Sometimes joining a group conversation involves entering a circle of people
who are talking. You may be able to do this silently, or it may be
appropriate to give a quick “hi” or nod to everyone as you walk up to them.
In other situations, like while sitting in a break room at work, you may not
physically join the group, but be near them and able to hear their
conversation. Either way, once you pick up on a chance to add something
relevant, you can jump in with your contribution and then be part of the
discussion. Make sure you wait for a small pause before you interject. You
don’t want to blatantly cut anyone off.
“Mind if I sit here?”
If you’re already sort of friendly with a group who are sitting around, you
can join their conversation by straightforwardly asking if you can sit down
and join them. This may seem intrusive, but the idea is to do it only with
people you’re already pretty sure would be open to you joining them, like if
you’re at your school or work cafeteria and see a group you’d like to know
better. Once you sit down, they’ll either start chatting to you directly, or
they’ll continue with their current conversation, and you can try to chime in
when an opportunity arises.
Start talking to one person in the group to get your foot in the door
If you see a larger group, there may be a member on the periphery who’s
focused on something else or who looks left out or uninterested in the topic.
If you strike up a conversation with them, you may be able to transition to
speaking to the larger group—they introduce you, they turn their attention
back to the larger conversation, and they carry you along; or the group
notices you talking to their friend, and then you introduce yourself. A
similar strategy is to wait until one group member is on their own, like if
they’ve gotten up at a party to grab a drink. You can start talking to them
when they’re alone and then join the rest of their friends with them soon
after.
However, don’t join a group discussion and then immediately try to steal
one or more members away to have a side conversation. Respect that they
want to talk to the group. If a smaller conversation splinters off a bit later,
that’s fine, but don’t shoot for one right away.
Join the conversation by way of an activity
Activities can be used to start both one-on-one and group conversations. It’s
mentioned here because it often allows you to chat with several people at
once. Parties often have group activities going on, like games of one kind or
another. In pubs you can find pool, darts, Foosball, and maybe an arcade
machine or two. You can easily get a conversation going by joining in and
chatting with the other players. Even if you can’t think of much to say, the
ebb and flow of the game itself will provide some things to talk about.
Start a conversation with the group the same as you would with a single
person
If you’re taking a direct approach with groups you don’t know, it’s usually
simpler and more courteous to begin the interaction by introducing yourself.
However, you could also open with a typical conversation-starting question
or statement. You’ll need to size up the group and try to get a feeling for
what type of opening line they may be receptive to. Some examples:
Ask about your common situation: “Are you guys having a good
night?”, “So how do you guys know (the party’s host)?”
Comment on the shared context: “This apartment is decorated in
such a neat way.”
Ask them a question about themselves: “Has anyone here been to
any concerts lately?”
Make a statement about them: “You guys seem like you’re from
out of town.”
Ask a question or make a statement about an outside topic:
“Anyone here see the game last night?”
Make a statement about yourself: (To a group of people you
already know somewhat) “The craziest thing happened to me this
weekend…”
How to be less quiet in group conversations
As a loose guideline, in a group conversation you should aim to speak about
as much as everyone else. So if there are four people in the group, you
should talk roughly a quarter of the time. Of course, you don’t need to hit
that exact percentage. What you really want to avoid is being silent for long
stretches. As Chapter 1 says, there’s nothing inherently wrong with being
less of a chatterbox. Many social circles have members who are on the quiet
side and whom everyone likes just fine. However, there are times when
you’re being quieter than you’d like in a group conversation, and not by
choice. Here are some suggestions about how to be more talkative:
Work on the anxiety or confidence issues that could be holding back
your ability to contribute in groups
As with one-on-one interactions, it’s often not a lack of conversation
knowledge or technique that’s to blame for quietness, but mental barriers
like worrying about saying something lame or inappropriate, believing you
have nothing worth sharing, feeling uncomfortable being in the spotlight,
and feeling psyched out by certain types of people. If you believe this is
your main barrier to talking more, focus on the advice in the previous
section.
Accept that the topic won’t always be one you can easily contribute to
When a pair is talking, the conversation needs to stay on topics they’re both
interested in. With several people involved, the discussion may shift to a
subject most of the people want to talk about, but which the rest can’t add to
(for example, a job most of them share). Everyone finds themselves left out
from time to time, and it’s not a knock against you if you can’t chip in. Just
be a good sport and wait for the topic to change. If it doesn’t switch after a
few minutes, try bringing up a new one yourself. If you often find yourself
in conversations about subjects you legitimately can’t contribute to, that
may be a sign you need to get more life experience or that a particular
group isn’t a good fit for you.
Make little contributions instead of remaining totally mute
You can still seem engaged and keep yourself in the middle of the action by
adding small contributions like, “Yeah, I heard the same thing”, “No way.
Then what happened?”, laughing when appropriate, or making little
listening noises like “Oh” or “Hmm.” These verbal tidbits are also a good
way to speak a little here and there when another member has the spotlight
for a longer period of time. If you’re more inhibited about speaking up,
smaller statements can also help you slowly ease yourself into saying more
down the road.
Even if you’re not talking, appear to be tuned into the conversation
If several friends are chatting at a pub, there’s a big difference between
someone who’s not talking but is clearly attending to the discussion (by
leaning in, looking at the speaker, making an effort to hear them over the
background noise, nodding, and having an interested expression on their
face) versus someone who’s obviously bored or tuned out and trapped in
their head. The first set of behaviors sends the message that even if you’re
not talking right that second, you’re a part of the exchange. Even though
you’re not technically saying much, people will be less likely to consider
you quiet. You’re more prone to get that comment when your nonverbals
show you’re uncomfortable, uninterested, or checked out.
This point is also practical in the sense that if you make an effort to tune
into the conversation, you’ll have less mental energy to devote to fretting
about how quiet you’re being. You’ll also be more likely to spot snippets of
dialogue that could trigger a thought you could contribute.
Tell yourself that you have to say something every so often
If you want to talk in group conversations more, it’s helpful to make an
explicit rule in your head that you have to say something at least every few
minutes. If the topic is changing constantly, you don’t have to chime in on
every one, but you should speak up often enough. If the discussion has been
on one subject for a while, you’ll want to give your two cents on it,
assuming it’s one you can add to. If you aren’t conscious about needing to
contribute, it’s easy to settle back or zone out and go too long without
saying anything.
The following rule trumps this one. If you find yourself getting more and
more stressed out because you’re too focused on monitoring your
continually dropping “contribution percentage,” give yourself permission to
be quiet and take the pressure off yourself.
Give yourself permission to be quiet
A lot of people psych themselves out when they try to be less quiet. They
put pressure on themselves to say something, and if they don’t, they get
more and more self-conscious and inhibited, which makes the problem
worse. Take some of that burden away by permitting yourself to be quiet. If
you can think of something to say, great, but if not, that’s okay too. It’s not
that unusual for people to go silent during stretches of group conversations.
Maybe in a few minutes the topic will change to one that suits you more, or
you’ll do better next time.
How to handle loud, lively group conversations
Many people don’t have too much trouble with calm, orderly group
conversations where everyone sticks to a topic, lets others finish their
points, and listens respectfully. Shy, reserved types usually find group
conversations more difficult and irritating when they get more hectic—
when everyone is excited and trying to talk over one another, the topic
keeps changing, and the overall vibe becomes more immature and showoff-
ish. Your approach to these conversations should be a mix of accepting
and adapting to them for what they are, while doing what little you can to
try to turn their intensity down.
Accept these types of conversations for what they are and what they
aren’t
What sometimes bothers people about chaotic, boisterous group
conversations is that they feel they could have been something else—polite,
intellectual, easy-to-follow, courteous—but they aren’t. By nature they’re
loud, scattered, inconsiderate, and “dog eat dog.” They’re for laughs,
spirited debate, and enjoying the company and essence of all your friends at
once. Aspects of them are an acquired taste. Being in the middle of all that
noise and chaos can be energizing, and you may get a cheap thrill when
trying to hold your own in it.
Try your best to tolerate the inherent annoyances of the situation
Hectic group conversations can create a maddening din as everyone talks at
once. If the group is big enough, there may be several subdiscussions, and it
can be confusing and overwhelming to try to follow them all. One or more
people may be derailing every tangent with idiotic jokes. It’s easy to
become annoyed and exasperated, then give up and shut down. Do your
best to put up with all the noise and stimulation so you can get what you
can out of the interaction. It may be frustrating to try to keep your focus, but
with time, you can improve your ability to follow along.
Realize if you want to get speaking time, you’ll have to grab it for
yourself
These conversations are more “every man for himself.” They’re not
purposely heartless; it’s just that everyone is excited and wants to talk, and
they’d rather it be them than you. Waiting patiently for the others to
recognize that you have something to say usually won’t work. You have to
treat these interactions like a game and find ways to get your fair share of
the spotlight.
Below are some ways to become the speaker. All of these behaviors are
more acceptable in wild group conversations than in standard day-to-day
group conversations. You can still go overboard, but if you don’t do them
too obnoxiously, no one takes these behaviors too personally.
Make it really, really obvious with your body language that you want
to talk after the current speaker is finished by leaning forward, raising
your hand slightly, and catching everyone’s eye to let them know you
want to speak next.
Make a statement such as, “I’ve got something to say about that after
she’s done.”
Be the first one out of the gate when one person finishes talking.
Interrupt someone or cut them off after they’ve spoken for a while.
Raise your voice to overpower anyone else who’s also trying to be
the next to talk.
Repeat the beginning of your statement several times until you’re
given the floor.
Bring your point up again a minute later if you weren’t able to
become the speaker on your first try.
Once you’ve got the floor, here are some ways to defend it:
Speak with enough volume that you can’t be talked over.
Talk quickly to get your point out before someone cuts you off.
Make your statements to the point. You won’t get away with
rambling on.
Use gestures to indicate to other people that you’re not done talking
so they shouldn’t cut you off. For example, loosely hold your hand
up to make a “stop, not yet” signal.
Say things like, “Whoa, whoa, hold on, I’m not done, I’m not done.”
Don’t be too dry. Zest up your statements with some humor or
creative language so everyone will be more interested in hearing
them.
Many people have painful memories of times they tried to chip in to a
group discussion and got ignored or talked over, even if they repeated
themselves several times. Reading about group dynamics may help put
those experiences in perspective. Getting overlooked like this happens to
everyone from time to time, and it’s nothing personal. When people are
really focused on following group conversations and are also busy
strategizing about how they can talk next, they can inadvertently tune out
the other members who are trying to jump in.
Ways to ease the madness and help other people be included
You have to accept that these conversations can get hairy and go along with
their unwritten rules to a point, but you can do some things to try to rein
them in too. Depending on how many people are in the group and how
amped up they are, your efforts may not have a huge effect, but you can try.
If you’re good at getting your speech time, don’t be selfish. Ease off
a bit to give other people space to contribute.
Help the quieter or less eager people in the group get a chance to talk
by signaling to the others that they have something they’d like to say.
If you can tell someone really wants to finish a point, and you’re
tempted to interrupt, try to resist that urge.
If a less forceful person makes a point and it’s falling on deaf ears,
direct the conversation back towards them (for example, “Sorry,
what’s that Natasha? You were talking about…”).
If another group member keeps cutting people off, shift the
discussion back to the person who got interrupted (“So anyway,
before you got cut off you were saying…”).
15
Making Conversation in Particular Situations
PEOPLE OFTEN SAY they have trouble making conversation in certain
situations: when they’re talking to people they know well, when they’re
first hanging around a group of friends who all know each other well, or
when they have to mingle at parties. This chapter helps you navigate
conversations in those situations.
Talking to people you know well
Some people are fine talking to someone new, when there’s lots of
unexplored ground to cover, but they feel like they’re out of material with
their closer friends. The good news is if you’re already on fairly friendly
terms with someone, they’ve unofficially signed off on being interested in
you and what makes you tick. You may not have every last thing in
common, and certain interests of yours may do nothing for them, but on the
whole they’re open to whatever you want to bring up. So don’t hold back
too much.
When you know someone, you can devote some of the conversation to
catching up on what you’ve been doing since you last saw each other. The
better you know someone, and the more often you talk to them, the more
detail you can go into. If you haven’t seen someone for three years, you’ll
answer, “What’s new?” with a sweeping summary like, “Well, I started my
own contracting business, and we have a second kid on the way.” When you
talk to someone all the time, you’ll have a more detailed answer like, “I
figured out what was making that noise in my car…” When you hang out
with someone often, you’ll also generate new events to discuss (“So I spoke
more to that guy we met at the party last week…”).
Finally, you can always find out more about each other. Even long-time
friends don’t know every detail about each other’s childhood or their
opinion on every topic. There’s always more to learn.
Hanging out with new people who all know each
other
A lot of us get nervous when we first hang around a group of people who
know each other well, such as a friend’s friends who all grew up together.
Sometimes the initial meeting goes off without a hitch. You jell with the
group right away and are welcomed into the fold. When it doesn’t work out,
the group members socialize among themselves, while making lots of inside
jokes and references to past experiences, and you’re left standing on the
sidelines.
If that happens, it usually isn’t because you did something wrong or the
group is purposely being mean and exclusionary. They just all know each
other, and it’s easy and fun for them to stick to the familiar. They may also
be a bit lazy and see getting to know someone new as work, when they
could just hang out with their buddies instead. Some of the group members
may be shy too, and feel inhibited about engaging someone unfamiliar.
If you don’t have a good conversation with them, don’t get too down on
yourself. It’s a trickier, more nerve-racking situation to navigate, and if the
group isn’t receptive to getting to know someone new, there’s only so much
you can do. Here’s what you can try, alongside the general advice in the
previous chapter on handling group conversations.
Take the initiative and throw yourself into the mix
Because it’s easy for the group to benignly overlook you, take the initiative
to try to get to know everyone. You can’t wait and count on them to bring
you in. Basically, whatever the group is doing, put yourself in there and
attempt to join their conversation. If you’re at someone’s place and they’re
all playing video games, sit down and grab a controller. If you’re all at a
club and they’re dancing or playing pool or talking on the patio, then that’s
where you should be.
Accept you won’t be able to contribute to some topics
There’s only so much you can do if the inside jokes start flying or everyone
starts updating each other on what another friend has been up to lately.
Maybe you’ll have an opportunity to add something, but for the most part,
you just have to wait out these stretches. You could also try getting in the
loop by asking something like, “Who are you all laughing about? An old
friend?” If the explanation is quick, the others may fill you in, but
sometimes there will be too much backstory for them to cover.
Act as if you’re a long-time group member instead of asking getting-toknow-
you questions
When you’re around a group of new people, your first instinct may be to
ask them basic getting-to-know-you questions. Sometimes that works, but
they won’t always be receptive. Established groups already know one
another’s basic backgrounds and talk about other topics when they hang
out. When they’re speaking with you, they may not be in the mood to be
interviewed about themselves. They want to talk with their buddies and
want you to jump into the discussion and contribute as if you’re familiar
with everyone too. For example, if they’re telling funny travel stories, they
want you to pipe up and tell yours too. If they’re talking about a popular TV
show, they want you to share your opinion on it.
As the conversation moves along and hits on more topics, you’ll get to
know what they’re like from what they add to it, and they’ll learn the same
about you. Chances to learn bits of everyone’s life history will come up
organically. This isn’t to say some members won’t be open to a more
standard getting-to-know-you exchange, especially if you get a chance to
talk to them one on one. However, if you initially try that and they don’t
seem enthusiastic, switch to the other approach.
Don’t feel like you’re at an audition
Don’t put too much pressure on yourself to show your best side and win
everyone over the first few times you hang out with them. That can
backfire. You can get a bit nervous, try too hard to be funny and interesting,
and not make the best impression. Even though you do have to take the
initiative to join the group’s interactions, you don’t have to go over the top
and dazzle everyone either. Act the way you normally would around
friends. If the group is going to like you, they’re going to like you. Just do
your thing and see how it all plays out.
Mingling at parties
Parties are one of the top social situations people have trouble with. They
know they’re supposed to mingle, but they don’t know how exactly, or it
makes them too nervous. Depending on the type of party, there can also be
an expectation to be “fun” and “on.” Here are some tips for getting through
parties and being able to talk to people (but not necessarily being the zaniest
person there).
Acknowledging the outside forces at play
As with making conversation in general, some of your results at parties will
be influenced by your interpersonal skills. The rest is out of your hands and
determined by outside forces. Some factors that will affect your experience
at a party are
what kind of party it is and whether it suits your strengths and
personality (that is, is it focused around cerebral group discussions or
drunken antics?);
the other guests and whether they’re the type of people you get along
with;
how well everyone knows each other. Is it mainly friends who have
known each other forever or people who are strangers to each other?
how open everyone is to meeting new people. Are they there to make
new friends, or do they plan to stick to the group they came with?
Don’t place too much importance on how well you socialize at parties
Parties are just one way people get together. For the average person, they
come up only occasionally. They can be fun and lively, but they’re not the
be-all and end-all of social interaction. Some people blow the significance
of parties out of proportion and measure how well they get along with the
strangers they meet as the ultimate test of their social worthiness. If it’s
important to you to be able to mingle, then you should work on it. But at the
same time, know that plenty of people have great social lives even if
working the room and being memorable at big gatherings isn’t their strong
point.
Regarding the expectation that you have to have a caaah-raaazy time,
many people’s idea of a good night at a party is to mainly hang out with the
friends they came with in a low-key way, have a couple of drinks, and
maybe chat with a person or two they don’t know. They don’t feel they’ve
failed if they haven’t done a bunch of keg stands, jumped off a roof into a
pool, and made twenty new buddies.
Deciding the best time to arrive
How early or late you show up at a party can influence how comfortable
you feel socializing with the other guests. Some people find it’s good to
arrive early (not overly early, of course, because that can inconvenience the
host). Fewer guests will have arrived, and you can talk to everyone under
more low-key circumstances and in smaller, more manageable groups. As
the other guests trickle in, you can get to know them as they arrive.
However, this doesn’t work for everyone. Some people feel more exposed
and on the spot if they’re at a party early with hardly anyone else. It’s also
less of an option if you don’t know the host(s) that well.
The other option is to arrive later, when you’ll have lots of existing groups
to join. You may also like that you can disappear into the crowd and not feel
like you stand out. If you find a conversation awkward, you can quickly
escape to someone else, rather than, say, being stuck having to chat with
just the host and her two good friends for twenty minutes. There are
downsides to this approach too. Some people find a room full of guests who
are already talking to each other intimidating. Everyone may be into their
conversations, and groups can feel harder to break into. Finally, as the night
goes on, people get more rowdy, which may not be your style.
Ways to approach and chat with people at parties
Previous chapters covered how to feel comfortable approaching people and
how to start and maintain conversations with them, so this section won’t
repeat all of that. Here are some party-specific ideas for getting into
interactions:
If you’re going to mingle with strangers on your own, you can talk to
whomever you want to. Pick a person who’s close to you, or who
seems interesting or approachable, or just go up to someone at
random. That may sound too simple, but you really don’t need to
think about it more than that.
Ask the person throwing the party to introduce you to everyone.
(This isn’t always an option, though.)
Give yourself a role, like the person who takes people’s coats and
shows them where the snacks and drinks are.
Join one of the activities that may be going on (for example, a card
game, a group watching TV or playing video games in the basement).
Initiate a new activity to get people talking, like playing a board
game or drinking game (if it’s the type of get-together where that
would be appropriate).
Two approaches to mingling
The first approach to mingling is to be more mechanical and try to have at
least a brief conversation with everyone at the event. The second is to go
with the flow, talk to whoever catches your fancy, and see where the night
takes you. You might end up in a bunch of short interactions, or you may hit
it off with the second group you talk to and spend the rest of the party with
them.
The try-to-talk-to-everyone approach is more appropriate if you’re hosting
the event; it’s expected of you to be polite and say hello to everyone. You’d
also use it if it’s important for you to meet everyone there, or if the party
has a business or networking component and you want to be sure to make
the rounds and talk to everyone you need to. The more casual approach is
best when you’re attending a bigger, purely social party. In those situations,
most of the guests won’t try to speak to everyone else because it’s often
impractical and would get in the way of their spontaneous fun.
Leaving the party
Some people find leaving parties awkward. If you don’t like seemingly
being the center of attention as you announce you’re heading out, that’s
simply something you can get used to in time. If you’re not sure how to say
your good-byes, it’s polite to let at least the host(s) and your good friends
know you’re taking off. If you’ve met some new people you’d like to stay
in touch with, you can track them down and get their contact info before
you go. Don’t feel you have to tell every last guest you’re done for the
night. Whoever you tell, just say you’re heading off and don’t think you
have to have a five-minute going-away chat. There’s no need to act
sheepish if you’re leaving early. Every party has guests who have to go
before the others. If you get flak, stick to your guns, then quickly make your
exit before you can get sucked into an argument.
16
Becoming Aware of Empathy
EMPATHY IS THE FIRST of four core conversation skills this stretch of the book
is going to cover. You can technically interact with people without being
empathetic, but you’ll be at a big disadvantage. The chapter defines the two
types of empathy and explains their benefits, then offers some suggestions
on how to cultivate it in yourself.
Empathy defined
Broadly speaking, empathy is the ability to put yourself in another person’s
shoes. There are two types:
Emotional empathy is the ability to pick up on other people’s
emotions and have an appropriate feeling in response. For example, if
your friend gets some upsetting news, you feel sympathetic for them
and a bit sad yourself. Sometimes people refer to empathy as this
ability to feel what another person is feeling. At other times what
they mean by empathy is acting on those feelings and showing
concern and support.
Cognitive empathy is the ability to more logically get inside
someone’s head and take on their perspective. You don’t necessarily
feel what they’re feeling, but you can rationally understand how they
see the world (for example, a certain book doesn’t bother you, but
you can grasp how it would be offensive to someone with more
traditional values). Again, some people see this kind of empathy as
simply being able to deduce what’s going through another person’s
mind, while others don’t think someone is being empathetic unless
they effectively put their conclusions to use.
Of course, there’s overlap between the two because you can often use one
to give you information about the other (for example, knowing someone’s
worldview and history helps you emotionally empathize with why a certain
event makes them so angry).
Benefits of empathy
Overall, empathy helps you to discern people’s needs, emotions, values,
interests, and overall personality. It doesn’t take much effort to see how
these skills could be useful in social situations:
In conversations, it helps you answer questions like: What are they
looking for from the exchange? What topics would they enjoy talking
about? Which ones would make them uneasy, bored, or offended?
Why are they telling this particular story, and what reaction do they
hope to get from me? Having answers to questions like these doesn’t
mean you have to become a soulless chameleon or spineless people
pleaser, but the information could help you make the interaction more
mutually enjoyable and rewarding.
In your day-to-day life, it helps you be considerate of others.
Whether they’re feeling cheerful or worried, you can show someone
that you’re tuned in and care about what they’re going through. You
can do thoughtful things for your friends, like being extra supportive
to them on the day they have to give an important presentation or
making sure to let them know you appreciate a favor they did for
you.
It helps you generally approach new people with a more openminded,
welcoming attitude. A core part of empathy is accepting that
not everyone looks at the world the same way.
Knowing the mistakes that arise from not being
empathetic
You can make social errors when aspects of your empathy aren’t well
developed and you unintentionally come off as thoughtless and insensitive.
The errors fall into two categories that correspond with the two types of
empathy:
Mistakes caused by less-developed cognitive empathy
When you’re short on cognitive empathy, you don’t always consider the
other person’s point of view, which may upset them. Here are some of the
mistakes that arise:
going on about a topic that bores your friend because you haven’t
thought, “Maybe they don’t care about this subject as much as I do;”
being offensive by making crass or edgy jokes to people who don’t
appreciate that kind of humor;
bringing up topics that are inappropriate for the people you’re talking
to; for example, telling stories about your casual drug use to your
conservative grandparents;
being hurtfully blunt and casually critical; for example, “That shirt
looks really bad on you. It looks too tight on your potbelly… What?
Why are you getting mad?! I’m giving you useful feedback!”
disregarding things that are important to other people; for example,
forgetting an anniversary, or continuing to bring up a sensitive topic
around a friend even after they’ve asked you to stop;
seeming to take close friends for granted by always letting them do
nice things for you, but not realizing they’d like you to show
appreciation in return;
getting annoyed at someone for not grasping something that’s
obvious to you because you don’t consider that they may not have the
same education, experience, or talents.
Mistakes caused by less-developed emotional empathy
When you haven’t fully developed your emotional empathy, you don’t
always feel the emotions of the person you’re speaking with. This creates a
disconnect in the interaction. Consider these mistakes:
not responding much at all when people are really upset or happy;
giving invalidating, tone-deaf responses to people who are distressed;
for example, “Why are you so upset your pet rat died? You knew it
was only going to a live a few years when you bought it.”
seeming uncaring by not showing much reaction to bad news about
other people; for example, looking unfazed upon learning a
roommate’s sister has been in a car accident.
Seeing why people may not show empathy
Sometimes people come across as unsympathetic and insensitive without
meaning to. They often aren’t aware that they’re not responding in the most
appropriate manner. Here are some reasons why people may not show
empathy:
They’re socially inexperienced, and either it isn’t on their radar that
they should care about other people’s feelings and perspectives, or
they know they should, but they aren’t very practiced at it. They may
unconsciously have a mind-set of “This is how I would feel in this
situation, so everyone else will be the same.”
They don’t know how to show they’re concerned or caring, or it
makes them feel flustered and awkward. If a friend is upset, they’re
not sure what to do with themselves, so they say nothing. They may
come off as emotionally blank because they’re too stuck in their head
worrying that they don’t know how to respond properly.
They have more logical, detached personalities and just don’t get as
emotional about things. News that may upset some people, like a
child from across the country going missing, doesn’t get to them
because they think, “Well, I don’t know them personally, so why
should it affect me?” What someone else sees as an insult, they may
see as a dry, rational critique.
People with a more solitary, independent social style sometimes
unintentionally become too focused on their own needs and forget to
consider everyone else’s. It’s not that they’re selfish monsters, just
that they develop some thoughtless habits as a side effect of spending
most of their time in circumstances where they only have to worry
about what’s best for them.
People who are going through a lot of stress and emotional turmoil
will naturally focus on their own problems.
When people are younger, especially in their teenage years, their
empathy sometimes hasn’t fully developed simply because they
haven’t had enough life experience. They haven’t encountered
enough hardship or been exposed to many contrasting worldviews, so
they have a tougher time relating to people who are hurting or who
see things differently than they do.
The above are benign, accidental reasons someone could seem insensitive,
but the fact is, some people lack empathy because they have a selfish, selfabsorbed,
arrogant, or close-minded side to their personality. Those are
clearly negative traits, which we all show bits of from time to time. If you
realize you have more than the usual number of those traits, you can work
on minimizing them.
How to develop and show more empathy
Your ability to emotionally and cognitively empathize with people can be
improved. No one becomes a flawless mind reader, but even being
moderately better at figuring out what others are thinking and feeling will
make a big difference in your interactions.
Ways to develop your cognitive empathy
Generally learn about a variety of perspectives and worldviews and try to
respect them
It’s hard to be empathetic if you unconsciously assume your way of doing
and thinking about things is the only correct one. Considering another point
of view doesn’t mean you have to condone everything about it, but you can
at least try to see the reasons for it. For example, if you’re careful with your
money, try to learn about the benefits of spending it more freely. Don’t look
at a different perspective through the filter of “My default style of looking
at the world is right, so I’m going to spot all the ways this other one is
ignorant and misinformed.” Aim to be nonjudgmental and open-minded,
and try to consider how someone could come to think this way.
Practice actively considering particular points of view
You can consider another person’s point of view while you’re in the middle
of talking to someone or as a solitary thought exercise. For example, if
you’re not a parent, try seeing things from the mind-set of your coworker
who has two young children. What’s important to them? What motivates
them? How are they similar to you? How are they different? What types of
things would they want to discuss? What wouldn’t they want to hear about?
Learn people’s basic needs
A component of empathy is figuring out what drives other people.
Everyone has needs that are unique to them, but most people also share a
set of basic ones. Most people want to
be liked;
be respected;
feel like they’re important to their friend;
spend at least some time being social for its own sake;
be kept in the loop about what their close friends and family are up
to;
feel like the things they have to say are interesting or entertaining;
feel appreciated and acknowledged for the things they do for others;
feel like their thoughts, emotions, and actions are healthy, reasonable,
and normal;
feel understood and supported when they’re going through a tough
time;
be given the benefit of the doubt when they screw up;
not be embarrassed or have their flaws or failures thrown in their
face;
feel accomplished.
Once you start considering these basic needs, you’ll feel much more
confident about how you could act in various situations. For example, if a
friend is telling you a funny story, odds are they want you to seem amused
by it, not bored. If they share a mistake they made, they don’t want you to
tut-tut them.
Ways to develop your emotional empathy
Learn to respect the role of emotions
People with more logical, cerebral personalities sometimes look down on
emotions and see them as irrational and unnecessary. When a friend or
colleague is feeling a strong negative emotion, their first thought isn’t “Oh
no! They’re so unhappy. How can I comfort them?” It’s “This is so
pointless. Why don’t they pull themselves together and use their brain to
work through their problem?” Emotions sometimes can lead people astray,
but they can’t be written off entirely. It’s best to have a balance of emotion
and logic.
Emotions are essential in making a lot of decisions. More logical
individuals think dry facts are all people need, but without emotions, we’re
often left with two choices that have an equal number of pros and cons on
each side. It’s those gut feelings of “Mmm, this one makes me happy” or
“Yech, I don’t want that one” that break the tie. Emotions also motivate you
to act. When you’ve been procrastinating on an assignment, the fear of
failing finally gets you started. Emotions are also a part of being human.
Even if you don’t have much use for them yourself, you have to accept that
they drive most people.
Learn to get in touch with your own emotions
People can have trouble with emotional empathy because they’re cut off
from their own feelings. If they see a family member looking depressed,
they may feel sad for them deep down, but not be able to access it.
Although some people are less baseline emotional than others, even the
most logical, analytical person isn’t a complete robot.
The idea of getting in touch with your feelings has a negative, touchyfeely
connotation for some people, but it’s hardly New Age fluff to have a
basic awareness of what’s going on in your own head and how your
emotions are affecting your behavior.
Here are some starter, do-at-home suggestions for getting more in touch
with your feelings. As a caution, if you’ve experienced a traumatic event
and are suppressing your emotions as a coping mechanism, it may be best
to do this kind of work with a counselor. Also be careful if you’re prone to
anxiety attacks that are triggered by noticing that things like your heart rate
or breathing have changed.
Get into the habit of asking yourself, “How am I feeling right
now?” Do this randomly throughout the day and when you’re
vaguely emotionally charged up. Sometimes you’ll be feeling a
certain way and won’t even be aware of it until you check in with
yourself.
Try to add more nuance to the way you identify your emotions.
For example, instead of calling an emotion “sad,” ask yourself if a
more accurate label might be “disappointed,” “regretful,” or
“dejected.”
Think about whether you use any tactics to avoid or bypass your
emotions. Some common ones are distracting yourself with work or
entertainment, immediately jumping into an intellectualizing
problem-solving mode, making jokes about the situation, changing
your mood with substances, or always being around other people so
you’re forced to hold it together.
In general, whenever you’re having an emotion, see if there’s
another one beneath it. It’s not always the case, but one emotion
can be masked by another. Sadder emotions tend to get covered up by
ones like anger and worry.
Think about whether you have a default emotion that you feel
whenever you’re upset, which drowns out your other feelings.
Common go-to emotions are anger and anxiety.
When you’re having an emotion, and you’re in a safe place to do
so, don’t try to push it away. Take your time and let yourself soak
in it. Notice what’s happening in your body. Is your jaw clenching? Is
your stomach upset? Do you want to make a glum face and slump
your shoulders? Could you use any of these observations to let you
know when you’re feeling the same emotion in the future? Even if
the emotion is on the stronger or more uncomfortable side, realize it
won’t hurt you or make you go crazy, and it will pass in time.
Practice feeling other people’s emotions
Just as you can hone your skills in tuning in to other people’s opinions and
worldview, you can work on being able to tap in to their emotions. Start by
watching a dramatic television show or movie. Pause during the emotional
moments and try to imagine yourself as the characters and feel what they’re
feeling. Say the protagonist finds out her car has been stolen. Rather than
continue on without giving it a second thought, take a few minutes to reflect
on what that would be like, how confused and then angry and
inconvenienced you’d feel. Next, think back on times people you know
were being emotional and try to empathize with them. As you get the hang
of that, empathize with people in the moment.
Practice in order to get more comfortable showing your support and
concern
Maybe you aren’t the best at seeming empathetic in the “showing concern”
sense of the word because it makes you feel awkward and self-conscious.
Even if you know exactly what to say and do to comfort a distraught friend,
it feels forced and artificial. Through experience, you can get used to
showing concern. Even if you’re truly feeling compassion for someone, the
first few times you say something like, “Wow, that must be tough…” you
may feel like an insincere bad actor, but it will become more natural.
Learn when it’s appropriate to play along on the surface
You may find yourself in situations where someone else is upset about
something that wouldn’t bother you. Even when you make an effort to see
things through other people’s eyes, you’re not always going to have the
same emotional reactions they do. Sometimes the most sensitive move is to
show the response that’s expected in that situation. Acting supportive and
understanding trumps getting to say everything that’s on your mind right at
that moment.
17
Core Listening Skills
PRIOR CHAPTERS HAVE TOUCHED ON the usefulness of listening skills. Here they
are covered in more detail with explanations about the benefits of listening
well and how to improve your skills in this area.
Understanding the importance of listening
At the most basic level, listening well lets you take in the most information
possible in a conversation. You’ll have more to go on when deciding what
to say next, and your interactions will flow better. If you don’t listen well,
you’ll miss some of the information the other person is sharing.
More importantly, listening well makes other people feel respected,
understood, and like you care what they have to say. If you’re not a great
listener, you can come across as uninterested, spacey, or self-absorbed.
People may hang out with you casually, but feel they can’t have a more
serious, substantial conversation with you. Listening is more than parking
yourself in front of someone and letting them make sounds at you. People
don’t need to feel that all of their conversation partners are fascinated by
everything they say, but they do want a sense that the other person cares at
least somewhat. Even if you just want to tell a corny joke to a coworker, it
doesn’t feel good when they’re obviously tuned out.
Being able to pay attention to people and take in what they’re saying, and
not coming off as disengaged, are bare-minimum considerations when
having a conversation. When people talk of “listening skills,” they’re often
referring to active listening. When you engage in active listening, you listen
in a more purposeful, focused, empathetic way; you really try to understand
where someone is coming from, show your interest, and read between the
lines of what’s being said. You’d particularly need to use active listening if
you were talking to someone about their problems, having a more
philosophical discussion, or trying to see the other person’s perspective
during an argument. This skill helps you connect with people, make others
feel accepted and supported, and resolve disagreements more easily.
While listening skills are extremely important to learn, you should have
realistic expectations about the effect improving them will have on your
social life. Some self-help sources oversell the significance of these skills
and claim that good listeners are rare and that people appreciate nothing
more than someone who truly listens to them. That’s an exaggeration.
Listening skills are really useful, but good listeners aren’t that scarce, and
being able to listen to people doesn’t guarantee everyone will like you or
that you’ll easily be able to get through any conversation.
Identifying facets of basic listening skills
More goes into listening than just hearing what the other person is saying.
Your ears, mind, and body are all engaged when you listen well. Consider
the following aspects that create a good listening experience, for you and
the person you’re talking to:
Intent
It sounds obvious, but one of the keys to listening properly is to want to do
it. When people are poor listeners, they usually aren’t that way on purpose.
They unconsciously come into the conversation with another agenda or
their own issues, which overrides their listening potential. For example,
they may be too focused on what they want to talk about and trying to
impress everyone. More on that at the end of the chapter.
When you interact with people, make a deliberate decision to try to listen
well. That involves
giving the other person space to say what they want to say, even if
you’re not entranced by every last word or they’re struggling to make
their point;
seriously considering what they’re saying, not just technically
hearing it but not giving it a second thought;
putting yourself in the other person’s shoes and taking on their
perspective;
being as nonjudgmental as possible;
avoiding any of the specific poor listening behaviors (covered in the
last section in this chapter).
Adjust the intensity of your listening depending on the context. If a friend
is telling you about a funny video his brother just sent him, you don’t need
to try to commune with his innermost being or worry about being open and
accepting. Simply let him talk and don’t interrupt.
Giving someone room to speak doesn’t mean you to have to put all of
your own conversation needs on the back burner. If someone’s telling you
an anecdote, you should listen respectfully, but if you have a story of your
own you’d like to share, it’s fine to bring it up at an appropriate time. If
they say something you disagree with, you can tell them you see things
differently, after you’ve respectfully heard them out. The good listener role
also doesn’t obligate you to stick in there with a long-winded monopolizer
or someone who’s inappropriately sharing the details of their recent trip to
the doctor.
Engaged body language
This makes your listening clear. When you display engaged body language,
you:
Make good eye contact with the speaker.
Face your body toward them.
Tilt your head slightly to the side
If you’re sitting, lean slightly forward.
Turn away from any distractions.
Have an appropriate expression on your face, depending on what
they’re telling you and what they hope to convey; for example,
concerned and understanding as they go over a problem, or interested
and amused as they tell you about their eccentric neighbor.
Nod and make little “uh huh” or “Mmm hmm” noises to show you’re
taking everything in and to encourage them to continue (mix up the
noises you make and how often you make them, or you’ll seem
robotic).
Having a mind-set of wanting to listen is still the most important aspect of
listening. Even if you nail all the nonverbals, people can usually tell if
you’re just going through the motions. Do each of these with a light touch.
The idea is to appear interested, not act like a caricature of a therapist.
Again, adjust this basic template based on the circumstances. If you’re
lounging on a couch and watching reality TV with your roommate while
they casually tell you about something weird that happened at school, you
don’t need to full-on face and lean into them. You could show you’re
listening by turning your head toward them, making occasional eye contact,
and saying “uh huh” and “yeah” every so often.
Responses
Responses in a conversation show that you’re listening. Check out these
pointers:
Make appropriate responses to what the other person says; for
example, replying, “Oh wow, that sucks…” in a compassionate voice
when they tell you about a sad childhood memory, or laughing as
they get to the funny part in a story.
Show an interest in what they’re saying. Ask for clarification if you
don’t understand a point, ask thoughtful questions to get more details,
make it clear you really want to explore the topic, and make
insightful comments and help them think of things they never
thought of.
Make responses that show you heard and understood what they said.
This can include agreeing they’re going through a tough time,
making a sympathetic murmur, sharing an experience of your own
that tells them you’re on the same page, and asking an intelligent
follow-up question that only someone who was really paying
attention would think of.
If they shared some struggles or vulnerabilities, validate that their
feelings are normal, and don’t judge them for the way they feel.
If they shared a lot with you, it may be appropriate to sum up what
they told you to show you’ve taken it all in and maybe help clarify
their thoughts for them. Paraphrase if you do this. Don’t parrot back
their exact words. Use this technique sparingly because doing it too
much can really make you look like a cartoon psychoanalyst.
If the speaker seems to want something from the interaction, like
your thoughts on how to deal with an issue with their parents, don’t
be in a hurry to give it to them. Let them get it all out first. Give them
room to explore on their own.
Avoiding being a poor listener
A lot of being a good listener is avoiding the habits and behaviors that make
you a poor one:
Talking so much that you’re hardly ever in the listener role
Not seeming to pay attention to the other person or seeming like
you’d rather be doing something else; for example, looking around
the room, checking your phone every two seconds, not turning away
from the TV, not putting down the magazine you’re reading
Having bored or distracted body language (see Chapters 18 and 19)
Interrupting
Being too eager to fill silences; not giving the other person space to
form their thoughts
Finishing the other person’s sentences for them
Cutting in with a premature summary of what you think the other
person is going to say
Cutting off the other person to respond to what you assume they’re
going to say
Abruptly changing the subject right after the person you’re talking to
is done speaking without responding to what they said
Giving a short, unsatisfying token response to what the other person
said, then switching to a totally different topic
People can be poor listeners because they’re self-centered, sure they’re
right, or not interested in a topic. There’s often a non-malicious explanation.
Someone could unintentionally come off as a bad listener because
They’re feeling shy and nervous and are too focused on their
insecurities to pay attention.
They have a naturally spacey, short-attention-span personality.
They’re in an energetic, overeager, talkative mood.
They’re legitimately distracted by stresses in their life.
They misjudged the mood of the interaction (for example, they
figured it was light and jokey, while the speaker thought they were
having a more serious discussion).
They thought the speaker had said all they needed to about a topic
and that it was okay to change the subject.
The environment is really loud or distracting.
You can’t always get it right. Sometimes there will be a misunderstanding,
and you’ll be seen as a bad listener without meaning to. However, if you
know you’re prone to any of the issues above, working on them will
indirectly help your listening skills.
18
Recognizing and Acting on Other People’s
Nonverbal Communication
NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION includes all the messages people are constantly
sending out aside from their words. Someone’s body language can tell you
whether they’re happy and energetic or tired and distracted. Their tone of
voice can change a compliment from straightforward to playful teasing.
They may tell you they’re not annoyed, but their angry gestures and facial
expression contradict their words.
You’ve probably heard that a huge 93 percent of all communication is
nonverbal. That precise statistic is a misconception. How much of a
message is nonverbal varies depending on the situation. However, the idea
it captures is true. You need to have a grasp on nonverbal communication to
socialize effectively. As with listening and empathy, being able to read
nonverbal communication gives you useful information about the other
person, which will help you make smart choices when you’re talking to
them. Managing your own nonverbal messages will let you present yourself
more confidently and help you keep your communication clear and
consistent; you won’t say one thing and have your body language
unintentionally say another. This chapter covers reading other people’s
signals. The next chapter goes into the ones you send out.
Reading nonverbal communication is a huge subject in and of itself, so
this chapter covers only the core material. It focuses on reading people’s
signals in friendly social situations, rather than on more specialized topics
like the body language clues that reveal someone is about to concede a
negotiation. The chapter ends with some tips on how you can practice
reading nonverbal cues. If you’d like to know more, the Further Reading
section suggests some more in-depth books on the subject.
Some overall points about reading nonverbal
communication
Sometimes a person’s nonverbals will reveal information they don’t want to
share through their words. However, reading nonverbal signals will never
let you completely scan someone’s mind. Tuning in to this type of
communication is not fully reliable for a number of reasons:
People know how to control and disguise the nonverbal signals they
send in order to be polite. For example, they’ll put a friendly
attentive look on their face, even though they’re not interested in the
topic you’re talking about. Sometimes their true intent will leak out,
but they can often hide it successfully.
People have different styles of communicating nonverbally,
depending on their personality, mood, age, gender, and culture. Some
are more cheery and animated; others always seem a bit flat and
gloomy. Some use common gestures in idiosyncratic ways. If you’ve
just met someone, you can’t fully know what their nonverbal signals
are telling you.
A lot of nonverbal communication is quick and subtle. Most of the
time, people don’t feel the intense emotions that lead to obvious
unspoken signals. For example, if you say something that mildly
surprises them, their eyes may just go slightly wide for a split second.
They won’t do a cartoonish double take.
Outside forces can interfere with the signals people would normally
send. For example, if they find the room chilly, they might come
across as more tense and closed off because they’re distracted and
hunching up to try to keep warm.
All in all, you should try to glean what information you can from people’s
nonverbal messages. At the same time, know you’ll never have a perfect
understanding of what they’re thinking, so you should focus on going after
your own social goals. For instance, if you want to talk to someone in your
class but you can’t tell if they’re in the mood to chat, give it a shot and see
what happens.
Any one nonverbal signal in isolation can be unreliable. Consider the
overall picture when attempting to read people. For example, crossed arms
can be a sign that someone is bored or guarded, but it could also mean they
find the position comfortable. You need to weigh that one piece of
information in light of everything else. If they’ve been smiling and eagerly
talking to you the whole time they’ve had their arms crossed, it probably
doesn’t mean anything. If they suddenly cross their arms while turning
away from you and making a disapproving face, that’s another story.
Although it’s vital to know how to read negative nonverbal cues, it can be
nerve-racking territory if you have shy or insecure tendencies because
you’ll tend to overanalyze, assume the worst, and see unhappy signals
where none exist. You can read negative meaning into ambiguous signals
such as someone having a neutral facial expression. If you find yourself
doing this, focus on dealing with those insecure thinking patterns.
Some important channels of nonverbal
communication
When you think of nonverbal communication, you may think that the face,
arms, and hands are the only sources of these signals. You can find out
much about a person’s thoughts through other means. Consider the
following avenues of nonverbal communication:
Facial expression: This is a huge source of information because people’s
emotions are mainly communicated through their facial expressions.
Sometimes a feeling only flashes across someone’s face for a split second.
Tone of voice: You could consider tone of voice a part of verbal
communication, but it’s included with the other nonverbal signals because it
can modify the meaning of someone’s words. A simple “hi” can be injected
with any number of emotions, like cheerfulness, tiredness, or polite
obligation.
Use of eye contact: In Western cultures, people are seen as confident and
interested in others when they maintain solid, though not overly intense, eye
contact. Less use of eye contact can signal discomfort, distraction, or
shiftiness.
Open or closed body language: When someone has open body language,
their arms are at their sides, their legs are somewhat spread apart, they’re
facing you with their torso, and their body generally looks loose and
relaxed. It’s a sign they’re feeling comfortable and accepting. Closed body
language is tense and protective, with arms either stiffly held at the sides or
crossed over the torso, and the legs close together. It could mean they’re
feeling guarded, nervous, or skeptical.
Leaning: If someone leans in toward you, it’s a sign of their interest and
attention. Leaning back is harder to read and can indicate anything from
lower interest to just a casual, relaxed attitude.
Use of gestures and mannerisms: Individual gestures have their own
meanings, like a nod to indicate interest. There are too many to list in this
small chapter. Overall, when people are engaged and excited, they’ll tend to
gesture more. If they’re tired, relaxed, or uninterested, they’ll be less
animated. Fidgety gestures can be a sign of boredom or anxiety.
Use of touch: Some people use touch more than others. Normally we’re
more touchy with people we like and are close to, and are hands-off when
the relationship is more formal. With casual friends, we normally keep
touching to the upper back and upper arms. Anything else is for more
intimate contacts. You may give a friend a light clap on the shoulder when
meeting them or playfully nudge them when they poke fun at you. If
someone shrinks from your touch, they may not be sure of you yet or just
not used to being touched in general.
Use of objects and the surroundings: If you’re talking to someone and
they’re playing with their phone or absentmindedly ripping up a coaster, it’s
probably a sign they’re not fully engaged with you. If you’re not
comfortable with someone, you may move until you’ve put a table between
you.
Use of personal space: Distances vary between people and across
cultures, but we all have a variety of personal space zones. Outside of a
crowded subway or really noisy bar, you won’t let a stranger get as close to
you as you would your best friend. Closing the space with someone means
you feel more familiar and comfortable with them. You tend to feel uneasy
and back off if someone gets closer to you than you think the relationship
justifies.
Body and feet direction: We often unconsciously point our body where
we want to go. If you’re interested in talking to someone, you’ll face them.
If you want to be somewhere else, you’ll start angling away.
Positioning relative to others: In larger groups people can reveal aspects
of their mental state based on where they place themselves compared to
everyone else. For example, in a larger group discussion, if three people are
standing together, it may mean they’re especially close friends or they want
to have a side conversation. If another person is standing slightly off to the
side, it could mean they’re feeling shy and left out or they’re preoccupied or
not interested in what the others have to say. If the entire group is standing
away from everyone else at a party, it may mean they want to talk privately.
Fashion sense and grooming: The clothes people wear aren’t completely
reliable as a nonverbal signal, but people communicate a lot through their
clothing choices. For example, they may be sending the message that they
want to be seen as artsy and nonconforming, slick and wealthy, tough, or
into a certain hobby. How well put together they are on any given day can
also give you clues about someone’s mental state (you’d know something
was off if your normally well-dressed friend showed up to your house
unshowered and wearing yesterday’s outfit).
Some important clusters of nonverbal signals to know
When reading people’s nonverbal messages, you want to be able to tune in
to basic information like what emotions are showing on their face. People
also make groups of signals to show their overall mood and comfort levels.
Approachability signals
You’ll never fully be able to tell whether someone is open to talking to you.
Sometimes the most unapproachable-looking person will happily chat to
you once you break the ice. Here are some general guidelines:
Approachable
friendly, happy facial expression
open, relaxed body language
looking around, as if scanning for people they could talk to
standing near other people or in the middle of the room where all the
action is
smiling or nodding if you catch their eye
(for groups) members are arranged loosely and are standing fairly far
apart with plenty of room for someone new to join
Less approachable
less happy or preoccupied facial expression
closed body language
in their own world, not paying attention to other people
standing off to the side, away from everyone else
clearly paying attention to something else, like their phone
wearing headphones
giving you a blank or unwelcoming expression if you catch their eye
(for groups) members are standing in a tight, closed circle
Nonverbal signs of platonic, friendly interest, comfort, or happiness
smiling
solid eye contact
eagerly nodding and agreeing with what you’re saying
learning forward
open body language
tendency to make more big, animated arm gestures
body and feet facing toward you
If you’re getting these signals, you can reasonably conclude everything is
going well. Continue to watch the person’s nonverbal signals to see if they
change.
Signs of disinterest, discomfort, or being upset
There are a variety of ways someone may show that they’re less than happy
in an interaction with you. Again, any one signal is unreliable, but if you
pick up a group of them, it’s a sign something is off. You should think about
what’s happening in the interaction and whether you can do anything to
change its course.
Boredom, lack of interest, or indifference
glazed or tired expression in the other person’s eyes
tired, disengaged facial expression
saying “Uh huh” and “Mmm hmm” and nodding along as you speak,
but in a dry “going through the motions” way
yawning
looking around the room
checking their phone
fidgeting, shifting on their feet, or fiddling with nearby items
leaning away from you
crossed arms
arms hanging leadenly at their side, lack of animation
body and feet pointed away from you
starting to edge away
If you’re getting these signals, try one of these approaches to recapture the
other person’s attention:
changing the topic to a more mutually interesting one
your own energy and enthusiasm
considering whether they’ve been talking too long and need a break
If you try one of those approaches and get the same result, it’s likely that
the other person doesn’t feel like speaking to you, so you should end the
conversation altogether.
Unease or not being sure about you yet
strained, tight, polite smile
mildly nervous or suspicious facial expression
leaning away from you
closed body language
flinching or tensing up if you touch them
standing away from you or increasing their bubble of personal space
putting barriers up between them and you (for example, a table or a
drink they’re holding in front of themselves)
Here are some suggestions if you’re getting these nonverbals:
If you’ve just started talking to someone, give them time to get used
to you.
Back off a bit if you’re being too touchy or animated, standing too
close to them, acting too chummy and familiar, or asking them for
personal information.
If you’re speaking about a controversial or emotionally charged
subject, try switching to a more pleasant or neutral one.
If you’re mingling, consider finding someone else to talk to after a
few minutes if their signals don’t change much.
Nervousness
stunned, deer-in-the-headlights facial expression
tense, preoccupied facial expression
tight or shaky voice
struggling to get their words out
sighing / exhaling noticeably
nodding quickly and saying, “Yeah, yeah, yeah” much more than
normal
laughing too much at small jokes, laughing when someone normally
wouldn’t (for example, “My name’s Bill. Ha ha ha…”)
overall tense or closed, self-protective body language
fidgeting
self-soothing gestures like rubbing their upper arm
twitchy, jumpy feet
To try to put someone else at ease, try one of these suggestions:
Give the person time to calm down in your presence.
Act pleasant and subdued, and stick to safe, routine topics that they
can respond to easily.
Consider whether you’re doing anything that’s making them feel off
balance.
Offended or disagreeing with what you’re saying
look of anger or annoyance
look of shock or incredulity (“Did they just say that?”)
suddenly closing off their body language
suddenly leaning back
partially turning away from you
If any of these signals arise during your interaction, think about the last
thing you said or did. The other person must have found it disagreeable or
insensitive. Consider changing the topic, backing off a strong opinion, or
apologizing (“Sorry, that joke was tasteless”).
How to get better at reading nonverbal
communication
Humans have a built-in capacity to recognize each other’s nonverbal
communication, though some people aren’t naturally skilled at reading it
and need to work a little harder to get the hang of it. Here’s what you can do
to catch up.
Look up what different expressions and mannerisms look like if you
have trouble recognizing them intuitively
It would be great if this book could include dozens upon dozens of photos
of different types of nonverbal communication, but that’s beyond its limits.
Some books that contain this information are listed in the Further Reading
section. You could also look up pictures of specific expressions online or
ask a friend or family member to model particular ones for you.
Practice reading other people’s body language
Here are some exercises you can try:
Put on a movie or TV show and try to identify the emotions and
nonverbal messages the actors are portraying. Of course, watch their
facial expressions and body language, but also gather clues from the
context they’re in. Broad, exaggerated comedies or soap operas tend
to be the easiest to read, while nuanced, understated dramas are the
toughest. Muting the sound will make the exercise more difficult,
because the dialogue won’t give you hints.
Do some inconspicuous people-watching in a busy public place like a
food court or nightclub and try to read everyone’s moods. Who’s
bored? Who’s stressed out? Who’s cheerful? Who’s trying to be the
center of attention? Who feels shy? Notice how some people have
more expressive or restrained styles of communicating their feelings.
Ask a friend or family member to act out various expressions and
mannerisms for you to try to read. They can purposely exaggerate
them at first, then gradually up the difficulty by making them more
subtle.
Try to read the nonverbals of people you’re interacting with. If
you’re having a friendly chat with someone, they’re not going to
show you the wildest anger or the deepest sadness, but you can still
try to look for changes in the more subdued expressions they’ll make.
Maybe they’ll look a little more stressed as they talk about an
upcoming assignment, or seem mildly bored while you’re talking
about a topic they’re only half-interested in, and then become livelier
when the subject switches to one they’re more passionate about.
19
Improving Your Own Nonverbal
Communication
YOUR OWN NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION affects how people see you. It’s not
the most flattering aspect of human nature, but we often size people up
based on a quick surface impression. As much as possible, you want your
nonverbal signals working for you. You’ll also communicate more clearly
and effectively if your words and nonverbal messages are lined up. This
chapter shows you how to complement your words with your nonverbal
communication.
Some important aspects of your own nonverbal
communication
Some of your nonverbal signals are beyond your conscious control. For
instance, if you’re scared your pupils will dilate. There’s nothing you can
do to override that. However, there are plenty of other nonverbal signals
you can control. Here’s a list:
Your use of eye contact: Are you making eye contact in a way that shows
you’re comfortable and attentive? Or do you give too little and seem
nervous or checked-out, or make too much and come off as intense or
combative?
Your resting facial expression: Does your neutral expression make you
seem approachable and content, or does it unintentionally send the message
that you’re bored or angry?
Your voice volume: Do you speak at a volume that’s easy to understand,
or are you too quiet or loud?
Your voice tone: Is your voice pleasant to listen to, or does it have an odd
quality to it? Does it convey confidence in what you’re saying?
Your overall level of expressiveness: Are you able to reasonably convey
your emotions, or do you come off as too blank and stiff or overly
animated?
Your overall body language: Does it make you seem friendly and selfassured,
or something less useful such as timid, overeager, aloof, or
aggressive?
Your posture: Are you holding your body in a fairly confident, attractive
way?
Your use of space: Are you maintaining a distance from people that fits
your relationship with them?
Your use of touch: Are you reasonably comfortable touching people in a
casual, social way? Do you shrink away when people do the same to you?
The way you dress and groom yourself: Are you styling yourself in a
way that complements your appearance? Are you making any errors that
could unnecessarily put people off?
General thoughts on improving your nonverbal
communication
Some of your nonverbal communication is influenced by your mental state.
Your body language is naturally going to be different when you’re feeling
nervous and uncertain of yourself compared to when you’re cheerful and
self-assured. As your confidence and social skills get better, some of your
nonverbals will improve automatically. Your body language may become
more open and inviting, or you’ll find it easier to hold eye contact.
However, some nonverbals are ingrained bad habits. For example, even if
you become more comfortable around people, you may still find you
consistently fail to look them in the eye, and you’ll have to try to correct
this more directly.
It takes time to improve aspects of your nonverbal communication. When
people realize they have poor posture, for example, they often consciously
vow to carry themselves differently. They can typically only keep it up for a
few days before it gets too physically and mentally draining, their focus,
discipline, and enthusiasm wear off, and they move on to other things. If
you really want to see improvements in an aspect of your nonverbal
communication, you have to give it more time and make it a priority
project, to the point where you schedule frequent practice sessions for a few
months. It’s not enough to just occasionally remember, “Oh yeah, I should
stand up straighter.” If you have several issues with your nonverbals, you
should try to tackle them one or two at a time, not all at once.
It’s often distracting to try to monitor and adjust your nonverbals while
you’re socializing. If you’re working on your conversation skills, you can’t
exactly throw “practice using open body language” into the mix and expect
to do either well. At first, try to work on your nonverbals in situations
where you can put your spoken communication on autopilot (for example,
while talking to a cashier). As your new nonverbals start to feel more
effortless and automatic, you can push yourself to use them in situations
where you have to think on your feet more.
Ways to improve specific facets of your nonverbal
communication
Eye contact
People are considered more confident, interested, and trustworthy when
they maintain good eye contact with the person they’re speaking with. That
doesn’t mean fixing your partner in a death stare. Instead, look them in the
eyes for three seconds or so, then glance away for a moment before meeting
their gaze again. In general, you should make more eye contact when
you’re listening, which is easier to do. When you’re speaking, it’s okay to
look away more, which often happens naturally as you get distracted by
trying to put together what you want to say. When talking to a group, spread
your eye contact among everyone.
Poor eye contact can be nothing more than a bad habit, but people often
avoid looking others in the eye because they find it too intense and
intimidating. Having a tendency to get lost in your head during
conversations can also hinder good eye contact. Here’s what can help:
If eye contact makes you nervous, start with social situations you can
handle and build up to the harder ones (see Chapter 7 for more
details). Maybe you can’t look an attractive authority figure in the
eye, but you can manage when you’re interacting with a restaurant
server or sales clerk. As mentioned, you’ll likely find it easier to
maintain eye contact when you’re listening rather than talking.
Two safe ways to practice are to watch TV and make eye contact
with the characters on the screen, and to stand in front of a mirror and
meet your own gaze.
You don’t have to look right into the center of people’s eyes. Looking
between or close by them will still register as eye contact from the
other person’s perspective.
Give your eye muscles time to get into better shape. If you’re used to
always looking down and away in conversations, it can be tiring to
continually look up at someone’s face and hold your focus on it.
Resting facial expression
Ideally you want your neutral face to look relaxed, happy, and
approachable. You don’t need to walk around grinning like a clown at all
times, but it’s good if you can seem reasonably content. Some people create
the wrong impression because their face unintentionally looks nervous,
bored, angry, zoned out, or unfriendly. There are a few reasons this can
happen:
They actually are feeling that way and may not be aware of it (for
example, they’re more checked out than they realize at the office
Christmas party).
Their facial features naturally make them look that way (for example,
someone with large eyes may seem more stunned and nervous;
someone with a prominent brow may look angrier).
Their overall look matches a stereotype (for example, if someone
dresses in a stereotypical hippie or stoner style, people may read their
neutral expression as zoned out and dopey).
They don’t always give off a misleading expression, but some of
their moods can be mistaken for others ones (for example, they look
annoyed when they’re tired, or bored when they’re deep in thought).
As with other facets of your nonverbal communication, your resting
expression may shift as you change your mentality and social skills. If you
tend to look nervous, that may go away as you become more comfortable
around people. You may start to look more relaxed and happy at parties,
rather than bored, when you know how to mingle and unlock their fun.
It’s too draining to do all the time, but when it’s important to do so, you
can consciously try to wear a happy, approachable facial expression; simply
smile slightly, open your eyes more, and relax your features. If you’re tall,
lower your chin so you don’t accidentally look down your nose at people.
You may also be able to adjust the impression you create with some tweaks
to your grooming, style, and posture. For example, if your eyebrows are
naturally downturned and grouchy looking, a little plucking may change the
vibe they give off. If you’re a big, imposing guy, some changes to your
fashion may make you seem less intimidating. If you have a wide-eyed,
fretful expression, better posture may help cancel out its effect and create a
more confident overall look.
Voice
There are two aspects to having a decent speaking voice. The first is to be
able to speak smoothly, pleasantly, and at a good volume. The second is
being able to get your message out in a way that shows you’re reasonably
confident in yourself and what you’re saying.
Voice volume
If you’re shy and unsure of your opinions, you may speak with an overly
quiet voice. The easiest way to talk with more volume and projection is to
speak from down low in your abdomen, which is more resonant than when
you use your throat to make higher-pitched sounds. Singing, acting, and
public speaking lessons can teach you to use your voice more effectively.
You may have to face a fear of making yourself heard and being the center
of attention. If your voice is always quiet, not just in certain situations, there
may be a physical cause, like weak vocal chords. See a speech therapist to
rule that out.
Voice quality
Most people’s voice quality is fine, but some have issues like stuttering or
speaking with an unusual tone or cadence. Speech therapy can help in these
cases too.
Voice conviction
The book has already mentioned the usefulness of bringing up your issues
and insecurities in a “no-big-deal” tone a couple of times, so you already
have a sense of how the way you say something can change the way it’s
received. A somewhat cynical observation is that if you watch popular
people socialize, they often aren’t saying anything that interesting or clever,
but because they’re speaking with conviction, everyone around them finds
them compelling. It’s too much to conclude, “As long as you seem sure of
yourself, you can say whatever dumb things you want,” but you do need to
nonverbally package your statements.
When you’re surer of yourself and your opinions, you’ll naturally start to
express yourself more confidently. Your statements will also seem more
self-assured if other aspects of your nonverbals, like your eye contact and
posture, are strong. Here are some more direct ways to speak with
conviction:
Purposely try to speak in a relaxed but assured tone that
communicates, “This is a perfectly natural, acceptable, interesting
thing to say right now.”
Speak with enough volume to be heard.
Speak clearly. Don’t mumble or talk into your chest.
Don’t speak too quickly in a rush to get your point out or not take up
too much time.
Be reasonably concise. Know what you want to get across, rather
than rambling on.
Try to cut down on filler words and sounds such as “Like” or “Uh…”
(if you need a moment to think, being silent for a split second is
better). Everyone uses filler words sometimes, but overdoing it can
make you seem ditzy.
Overall expressiveness
In addition to your facial expressions, expressiveness comes from varying
your voice and the gestures you make. If your face is always a blank mask,
you speak in a monotone, and you don’t move your hands or body much,
you’ll seem flat and bored, and be hard to read. On the other hand, being
overly expressive and animated can make you seem fake, flighty, or
agitated.
Aim to hit whatever the typical level of expressiveness is for your culture.
If you’re under-expressive, you’ll have to consciously force yourself to
gesture more often and put on a smile when you want to seem cheerful.
More than with many of these points, this feels very clunky and unnatural at
first, but showing a wider range of emotion will feel more normal in time.
Again, as you get more comfortable in your own skin, you’ll likely
naturally start to be more expressive. If you’re over-expressive you’ll need
to do the opposite and tone down your gestures and facial expressions. This
can also feel artificial and restrictive at first, but will become easier with
time.
Body language
In day-to-day social situations, you want body language that makes you
seem relatively confident, relaxed, friendly, approachable, and happy. This
involves
having open body language;
holding yourself in a loose, non-tense, and non-rigid way;
absence of nervous or fidgety gestures like rubbing your hands on
your pants or tapping your foot;
absence of unintentionally bored or disrespectful-seeming actions,
like looking around the room or fiddling with nearby objects.
You want your body language to seem self-assured, but casual and
relaxed. If you come off as overly confident, you will seem like you belong
at a sales convention, not a ho-hum social gathering. You also don’t want to
veer into confrontational or overly dominant territory (that is, standing with
your chest puffed out, body too rigid and rooted in place, hands planted
defiantly on your hips, invading other people’s space, or resting your hands
on people’s shoulders). Sure, maybe you’ll need to act like that if you’re
living in a rough neighborhood where only the strong survive. But in most
social situations, that kind of body language will either make you look
angry and unstable, or like you’re a jerk who’s trying too hard to be the top
dog at the expense of connecting with people in a friendlier way.
Posture
The most attractive, confident posture is when you’re standing upright with
your head and shoulders back, though not in a standing-at-attention way.
There are two main types of poor posture. The first is slouching—when
your shoulders are hunched and rounded, and your head juts too far
forward. The second is anterior pelvic tilt, which makes you look like you
have a potbelly, even if you’re thin. This poor posture occurs when your
hips tilt too far downward and your lower back arches too far inward,
causing your butt and stomach to stick out.
Posture problems are caused by muscle imbalances that pull your body
out of alignment. In slouching, the chest muscles are tight, while the ones in
the back are relatively weak. With the anterior pelvic tilt, the lower back
and hip flexors (the muscles near your hips that raise your knee up) are too
tight, while the abs and butt are weaker. These issues can develop due to
factors like slumping in front of a computer too much, compensating for old
injuries, or simply from entrenched habits. Some less-confident people
slump their shoulders because they chronically feel defeated or don’t
believe in themselves enough to walk tall. Genetic differences in spine
curvature can lead to posture issues as well.
To improve your posture, you need to strengthen your weaker muscles
and increase flexibility in the tighter ones. If you slouch, you need to stretch
your chest and work out your upper back. If your pelvic tilt is out of whack,
you need to regularly stretch your hip flexors and lower back, and work
your abs and gluteal muscles. If you log a lot of hours sitting at a computer,
change the ergonomics of your work station so it encourages you to sit up
straight.
Use of personal space
Confident people are comfortable taking up their reasonable share of
personal space. To do this, stand with your feet shoulder-width apart and
don’t be afraid to use the occasional bigger arm gesture. Don’t swing your
hands around wildly and try to claim six feet in every direction, but don’t be
shrunken and huddled up either.
Avoid unintentionally getting too close to anyone. Some people default to
speaking at a distance that’s too close to the person they’re talking to.
Observe what distances people in your area talk at and try to do the same.
You may also have a larger need for personal space and tend to pull back
when people try to talk to you at a distance that seems natural to them. If
your space bubble is impractically large, it can make you seem like you’re
scared of or uninterested in people. Try to get used to standing closer to
people. Don’t force yourself to put up with someone who’s standing too
close and being too familiar, but if you’re having a casual conversation with
someone who’s at a reasonable distance and you find yourself wanting to
retreat, try to override the urge.
Your use and acceptance of touch
You don’t need to touch others very often to do well in social situations.
However, if you’re uneasy touching people in even the most casual, friendly
way—say, by giving a light hug good-bye or touching someone’s shoulder
to get their attention—you can get used to it through purposeful practice.
Start with the types of touch that make you the least uncomfortable and then
build up to the ones that you’re more hesitant to do. If you notice people
often retreat from your touch, it’s a sign you may be doing it too much, too
soon, and in too familiar a way.
Some people are uneasy with being casually touched and may flinch or
show discomfort when someone else touches them. If that describes you,
you can get more used to being touched by consciously being aware when it
might be coming and forcing yourself not to react in a tense or jumpy way.
With time, it won’t faze you as much. Again, this does not mean you should
put up with touching that’s blatantly over the “casual and friendly” line.
Grooming and sense of style
How you dress or groom yourself affects how other people see you. If
fashion isn’t on your radar and you don’t dress in the most flattering way,
you may cause some people to unnecessarily write you off or assume
negative things about you, like you’re boring or don’t take good care of
yourself.
Don’t worry, though. You don’t need to become obsessed with clothes or
completely overhaul your appearance to have a happy social life. The
majority of people dress fine. They won’t win any style awards, but the
impression they make through their looks isn’t holding them back either.
People can err two ways in their style and grooming:
1. The first, rarer one is when they make cut-and-dried errors like
having bad breath, body odor, or unkempt facial hair; wearing
clothes with holes or stains in them; or sporting classically
unfashionable combinations like shorts, sandals, and pulled-up
white socks. If you’re making any mistakes at this level, then
saying you should fix them is going to be this book’s closest thing
to mandatory advice. Fortunately, these are easy problems to fix
once you’re aware of them.
2. The second is when someone isn’t making any flagrant mistakes,
but their overall sense of style is below average for the town or city
they live in. They dress and groom themselves in a bland, frumpy,
or unflattering way. If you fall into this category, you don’t have to
change. Lots of people who are indifferent to fashion have good
social lives. However, polishing your appearance wouldn’t hurt.
Maybe you’re worried your fashion sense isn’t good enough. However,
just because you’re reading a section on style and grooming mistakes
doesn’t mean you’re necessarily making any. It’s possible your appearance
is okay as it is. If you want to know if there are any areas where you could
improve, try asking some friends or acquaintances for their opinion. You
can also upload some photos of yourself in typical outfits to fashion-related
message boards online and get feedback.
Say you learn you could stand to polish your style. People often have
stronger reactions to the idea of having to dress better than they do to things
like improving their posture or speaking volume:
Many people have been picked on in their youth for wearing the
“wrong” clothes by peers who seemed overly concerned with the
superficial parts of life. When these people are older, they carry
baggage about dressing well. They see it as shallow and may even
feel like they’re letting the enemy “win” if they begin to focus on it
themselves.
More generally, someone may not personally care much about
fashion and resent the fact that they’re forced to devote energy to it
because the rest of the world thinks it’s important.
Some shy, self-conscious people have a fear of standing out and
making waves. One way they unconsciously manage it is by wearing
very conservative, nondescript outfits. When they’re told they should
dress with a little more panache, it triggers their anxiety, and they
react with a self-protective hostility.
They have poor self-esteem and think they don’t deserve to look
nicer.
They have an overly rigid self-image and equate dressing even
slightly differently with giving up everything about who they are.
Developing your style
This subsection won’t list a bunch of rudimentary fashion and grooming
tips like “brush your teeth every day”, “wear clothes that fit you well”, or
“regardless of your body type, you’ll look better if you’re fit.” If you
previously didn’t give much thought to your hygiene or style, once you’re
tuned in to it it’s easy enough to look up guides on those topics and figure
out what to adjust. This chapter is also not going to give you any specific
clothing suggestions, because what’s considered good style varies
immensely depending on your age, subculture, and the region of the world
you’re living in. Instead, here are some general guidelines on improving
your style on your own:
Don’t feel you have to become a fashion connoisseur to improve
your look. There are advantages to having above-average dress
sense, but it takes time and effort to get to that point, and the typical
person isn’t going to think less of you if you don’t look like you
stepped off a fashion runway. You just need to dress on par with the
other people in your city. That doesn’t mean you have to mindlessly
adopt the same uniform as them. You just need an average level of
fashion knowledge.
You can’t develop a better sense of style in a week. You’ll improve
your instincts little by little as you read up on the topic, observe how
other people dress, experiment with your own look, and get feedback
from the people in your life about what suits you best. Practically,
this means don’t go out tomorrow and spend a bunch of money in an
attempt to overhaul your wardrobe. Learn and buy a little at a time.
Changing your look, even for the better, may make you
uncomfortable. As you’re trying on new clothes, you may think
things like, “That’s not me. I’m not the type of person who wears this
stuff.” When you first wear a new type of outfit, you may feel like
everyone on the street notices how weird and different you look. Try
to push your comfort zone. You may be surprised at how, within a
few days, you’ll feel comfortable in outfits that initially made you
feel like you were playing dress-up.
Fashion-savvy friends can help you tweak your look, but any one
person can be hit-or-miss, because their sense of what looks good
may not match yours. You can get better feedback by consulting a
range of people. If everyone at your job or in your social circle says
they like your new haircut, you know you’re on the right track.
Try to get a sense of how people in your area and demographic
are styling themselves. You can do this by people watching. A less
conventional but efficient way to check out a lot of people’s styles at
once is to join a free dating site, make a fake empty profile, and then
look at who’s in your city. Ask yourself: What are some of the broad
style categories people fit into? What distinguishes the sharperlooking
people from the more generic or poorly dressed ones?
Find a good-looking haircut for your face. That might involve
growing it out or cutting it much shorter. If you have hard-to-manage
hair, take the time to learn how to properly handle it (for example, by
changing your shampooing routine or using products to control
frizz).
Glasses can look great if they’re the right frames on the right
person as the right accessory of a larger style package. Glasses
can just as easily send the signal of “stereotypical dork.” If you wear
glasses, consider whether you’d look better in contacts. They’re not
as expensive or high maintenance as you may think. If not, make sure
to choose frames that look stylish on you and jell well with your
overall look.
If you have a more bland style, you’re at risk for two mistakes
when buying clothes: 1) Going too far and buying clothes that are
overly flashy and gaudy; 2) Not going far enough and seeing run-ofthe-
mill clothes as too colorful for you. With experience you’ll get
better at finding that middle ground, but when you’re just beginning
to add pieces to your wardrobe, get a second opinion from a sales
clerk or friend.
20
Conversation Mistakes
THE PREVIOUS CHAPTERS have mentioned some conversation mistakes when it
made sense to bring them up. This one provides a more dedicated list of
mistakes to try to avoid. It can’t cover every mistake you could possibly
make in a conversation, but it includes the most common ones. Mistakes
can be one-off errors in judgment or be more habitual and stem from larger
issues in a person’s personality that they need to work on.
The No. 1 thing to remember about conversation
mistakes
Everyone makes mistakes while conversing from time to time. It’s great to
steer clear of as many bad habits as possible, but don’t put too much strain
on yourself to be flawless when you talk to people. No one gets it right 100
percent of the time. Also, even if you converse in a way that most people
find acceptable, you’ll encounter the occasional person who has a different
perspective and sees something as a mistake on your part (for example,
someone who’s overly sensitive may take offense to normal affectionate
teasing).
Don’t let a fear of making a mistake paralyze you. Many so-called
mistakes aren’t ideal, but they’re not that bad, and the conversation will
often continue just fine. For example, it’s not great to brag, but if you subtly
talk yourself up one time, most people aren’t instantly going to be turned
off. They may not even see it as bragging to begin with, just you stating a
fact about yourself.
If you’re just getting the hang of making conversation and are anxious
about getting rejected or making a bad impression, you can get so worried
about all the behaviors you have to avoid that your mind goes blank. Saying
something less-than-perfect is often better than saying nothing at all. At
least that way you’re keeping the conversation going and giving the other
person something to react to. For example, if you mildly brag about how
good you are at drawing, the other person may start talking about how
they’re into art as well.
If you catch yourself making a bigger mistake, you can usually smooth it
over by apologizing for it. Don’t say you’re sorry in too serious a tone. Just
quickly, casually acknowledge what you did wrong, then get on with the
discussion. For example, “Whoops, I just cut you off. Sorry about that. So
you were saying?”
Knowing when it’s okay to break the rules
People get away with making errors in conversations all the time. An
observation socially inexperienced people sometimes make is, “I’ve read
about all these things that are supposedly bad conversation habits, but I see
popular people doing them all the time. What gives?” There are a few
explanations:
Some “bad” behaviors are okay in certain situations. As Chapter
14 explained, it’s acceptable in loud, rowdy group conversations for
people to interrupt and talk over each other as they try to make their
points heard.
Some “bad” behaviors are accepted in particular subcultures or
social groups. In a group of young, bro-ish guys, mild bragging may
be common and acceptable. A circle of intellectual friends may be
fine with members correcting each other.
Individuals vary in which social mistakes bother them. Someone
who’s not a big talker themselves may have fewer issues with a
monopolizer. Someone with a crasser sense of humor may not mind a
less-sensitive friend. Our friendships are partially determined by
what mistakes we don’t mind, or even find endearing, in others.
People’s personalities are somewhat defined by the minor, mostly
tolerated mistakes they tend to make. “Yep, that’s Norm, always
telling those meandering stories”, “Mindy’s just excitable. I used to
get annoyed when she interrupted me, but now I’m used to it”, “Ha
ha, Dennis is a passionate guy. If you talk to him about politics,
you’re going to get into a debate with him. You’ve been warned.”
Mistakes
Mistakes fall into many categories and can creep into any conversation. You
can’t avoid all mistakes, but by being aware of potential missteps, you’re
more likely to sidestep or minimize the mistakes you’ll make occasionally.
General
Interrupting: Again, it’s sometimes okay to cut people off in rowdy
group conversations, but at any other time it’s inconsiderate. Make an
effort to let other people finish their thoughts and statements, even if
you’re eager to share what you have to say. The rare exception when
it’s okay to cut someone off is if they’re obviously floundering, but
can’t get themselves to stop talking and would like someone to jump
in and save them from themselves.
Not doing your fair share to keep the conversation going: You
don’t want to make your conversation partner do all the work.
Examples include giving short answers to their questions but not
asking any of your own, or simply acknowledging their statements
and not giving a fuller reaction. It’s okay not to pull your weight at
first if you’re shy or initially getting the hang of conversation skills,
but after that, don’t force the other person to do all the work of
keeping the conversational ball in play.
Being unwilling to give the types of replies people reasonably
expect to day-to-day questions: When you reply with an
unexpected answer to a standard question, you throw people off and
force them to scramble to come up with something else to keep the
interaction going. It may also make you seem negative or difficult.
For example, someone asks you how your job is going, and rather
than replying straightforwardly, you think, “Ugh, this question is so
boring. They must be trying to annoy me on purpose” and give a curt,
vague answer.
Trying too hard to force a particular dynamic: By all means, try to
start a certain dynamic if you think it will be enjoyable, but be
willing to change course if the other person isn’t biting. For example,
trying to get a teasing vibe going is fine, but if the other person
indicates they want to be more serious, you should respect their
wishes.
Being self-absorbed
Being selfish, not looking out for the overall health of the
conversation, and turning every subject back to what you want to
talk about: Within reason it’s okay to steer a discussion to some of
the things that interest you, but not at the expense of everyone else’s
needs. A good conversation has elements that every person in it
enjoys.
Monopolizing the conversation by hogging too much of the
spotlight and not letting others speak: Although some people like
talking more than others, in general everyone in the conversation
should have equal time to contribute. The exception is when
everyone has clearly shown interest in letting you take center stage to
share a longer story or opinion. You can gauge this interest by
throwing out a teaser sentence or two (“Did I tell you guys about the
time I…?”), then seeing if they seem to want to hear more, rather
than launching right into a longer spiel.
Being long-winded; going on and on when it’s your turn to speak,
rather than being more succinct: Even if you have a longer point to
share, you should still aim to make it as concise as you can. People
will get impatient if you ramble on too much. Continually check the
other person’s nonverbal signals (see Chapter 18). If they look
interested, keep going, but if they seem bored, wrap it up.
Bragging
Straight-out gaudy bragging: Simply put, most people find this
obnoxious.
More subtly trying too hard to bring up your talents and
accomplishments: It’s understandable that you’d want to make
people aware of your strengths, but let them come up naturally. You
may come across as insecure if you seem like you need to give
people reasons to approve of you right away.
One-upping: For example, “Yeah, zip lining’s cool and all, but I’ve
been skydiving about a dozen times, so I don’t know how much I’d
get out of it.” One way people accidentally one-up is when they’re
trying to relate to someone by sharing a similar experience, but theirs
is “better.” If someone wants to share an accomplishment or
experience, let them have it, and don’t feel you lose something unless
you can “beat” it.
Poor choice of topics
Bringing up inappropriate topics around people who won’t
appreciate them: The topic could be too controversial, offensive,
upsetting, disgusting, or overly personal and familiar. As Chapter 16
covered, try to consider other people’s perspectives and potential
reactions when choosing what subjects to discuss.
Not moving on from a topic that isn’t going anywhere: For
example, you’re trying to ask someone about their job, and they don’t
seem keen to talk about it, but you keep trying to get them to open
up. Know when to switch gears, and don’t assume someone would
enjoy a particular topic if they just gave it a chance.
Changing topics too abruptly: You don’t always have to make
perfect, artful segues, but switching topics too randomly can throw
people off. Chapter 9 gives some tips on segueing to a new subject.
Over-relying on complaining, negative, or downer topics to keep
your conversations going: This simply injects too many negative
vibes into the interaction, which wears most people down before
long. Discussions about personal problems can feel “deep,” but be
careful not to always steer your interactions into that territory
because it helps you get your fix of meaningful interactions.
Over-relying on critiquing topics, like picking apart the plot
holes in a movie you just saw with a friend: In moderation this is
okay, especially with other analyzer types, but it also adds some
negative energy to your exchanges.
Over-sharing by telling your heavy personal problems or foibles
to someone you barely know: Chapter 12 goes into more detail
about appropriate ways to self-disclose.
Mistakes often made by people who consider themselves intellectual
and logical
Speaking in a way that’s more blunt and direct than the other
person is used to: People and cultures vary in how to-the-point they
are, but if you’re more blunt than what your partner expects, it may
offend them or hurt their feelings.
Correcting people about minor things that aren’t relevant to the
overall point they were trying to make: Doing so usually makes
you look uptight and pedantic, and can throw the conversation off
course.
Being too quick to start debating people, especially if they
weren’t expecting it or don’t enjoy that kind of verbal sparring:
For example, getting into an argument about politics when they
offhandedly mention something funny about a politician. Most
people find arguing emotionally unpleasant, especially if it’s sprung
on them suddenly. It’s okay to disagree with people, but don’t
approach it from an adversarial stance where you think their view is
stupid and you have to “win” with yours. Approach differences of
opinion from the perspective that you’re both on the same team and
you’re respectfully sharing ideas to help each other learn and grow.
Talking at people rather than with them: That is, you’re thinking
out loud at someone about a subject that interests you, not having a
back-and-forth interaction. The other person feels like they could be
replaced with a cardboard cut-out, and it wouldn’t make much
difference. This is similar to hogging the spotlight, but it makes the
other person feel especially unimportant. It also makes people who
do it seem unaware.
Group conversation mistakes
Blatantly hogging the spotlight: The bigger the group is, the more
of a mistake it is to try to take all the airtime for yourself. However,
you have a bigger audience, and that urge to try to capture everyone’s
attention can be stronger.
Trying to have a conversation with one other person in the group,
rather than focusing on everyone: That is, not breaking off into a
side conversation, but just focusing on one person and ignoring the
others. It’s a group interaction. Every member deserves to be
included.
Cutting people off, interrupting, and doing other things to fight
to be heard when the interaction is low key: These things are
acceptable within reason during more hectic group discussions, but
will seem domineering or attention-hogging if everyone else is
interacting in a more restrained way.
21
Being More Likable
AS THE FIRST CHAPTER in this section said, your interactions will be
influenced by your comfort levels, your specific conversation skills, and
your broader personality. One trait that affects how much people enjoy your
company is how likable you are. People know this and often ask how they
can be more likable. The term seems vague, but this chapter lays out some
well-known traits of likable people.
But first, some disclaimers to keep in mind as you work on your likability:
A big factor in how people feel about each other is their
compatibility. We typically like those who are similar to us. Even if
you’re warm and pleasant, someone may not like you if you have
completely opposing views on the world. The traits covered below
will affect your likability in addition to, or in spite of, how well
matched you are to someone otherwise.
The traits below will help you become more likable on average, but
you can’t reliably use any one of them to guarantee a specific
individual will like you. As always, each person has their own tastes,
and you can’t win them all over.
As a whole, the list may seem like a bunch of bare-minimum
requirements to be a pleasant person, not someone outstandingly
likable. Likable people don’t operate using a set of secret techniques.
They just do more of the things below and at a higher level.
The traits below are pretty general. That means you can express them
in a way that blends into your overall style and personality.
There are many ways to be appealing. For every point listed, there
are many people who don’t have that trait who are still likable
because they make up for it in other ways.
Unless you have an especially off-putting personality, you’re
probably already likable to some people. You don’t need to be in the
top 1 percent of any of the points below to be liked; just being decent
enough at them helps your interactions.
Two ways to be more likable before anyone has even
talked to you
People start to form an impression of your likability before you’ve even
spoken. The first way you can seem more likable is if you make yourself
more physically attractive: by dressing and grooming well, being in shape,
and having self-assured body language. Even if you don’t transform
yourself into an Adonis, every little bit helps. People tend to see attractive,
put-together individuals as having more appealing personalities. It’s called
the halo effect. Of course, attractiveness is somewhat subjective, and you’ll
need to adjust anything you do based on your social goals and the types of
people you want to make a good impression on. An outfit or hairstyle that
may be considered good-looking in an artsy neighborhood in a big city may
not get the same response elsewhere.
Your reputation and accomplishments can also color people’s perception
of you. Have you ever seen someone from a distance and they seemed like
nothing special, but then a friend told you about something they did that
impressed you? It skews you toward seeing them in a more positive light
when you talk to them. The opposite can happen if you know someone’s a
jerk. You can’t actively control this point like the ones coming up, but when
you become more accomplished, it may affect the way people view you.
Be able to put your personality out there
Obviously you don’t want to seem unlikable. Another outcome that can be
nearly as bad is when people meet you and don’t form much of an
impression at all. This can happen if you’re extremely shy or quiet, or if
you’re so scared of saying the wrong thing that you discuss everything in a
very safe, bland way. You don’t have to become extremely outgoing or
forceful with your opinions or humor, but you need to show enough of your
personality that people have at least something to react to.
Be reasonably confident
On the whole, people like confidence in others. However, this isn’t to say
you have to come across as an ultra-assured salesman type of person. That
can be too much. Just be comfortable with yourself. Some people are even
likable by being slightly shy or eccentric, but owning it, rather than acting
ashamed and embarrassed.
Be reasonably cheerful and positive
Likable people are usually happy. They see the positives in things. They
don’t complain that often, and even when they talk about their problems,
they don’t let their energy get too negative. They can vent about their
annoying boss but have it come across as an entertaining story. A cheerful
emotional state feels good to be around and is somewhat contagious. Again,
you don’t have to be excessively chipper or never express a negative feeling
or opinion. Just try to maintain a good ratio of positivity to negativity.
Seem as if you like people
People generally find someone more likable if they seem as if they like us
and people in general. Conversely, people usually dislike anyone who
comes off as arrogant or aloof. The wording “seem as if” is used
deliberately. Some people inwardly feel misanthropic, but they’re seen as
likable because they’re outwardly friendly and personable. If you truly like
most people you meet, that’s great, but having that trait is easier said than
done. Some of us are choosier than others about who we want to chat to or
be friends with. You can still make it a point to be pleasant in your
interactions:
Show friendly and interested body language, like smiling, making
pleasant eye contact, and giving people your full attention.
Initiate conversations with people.
Eagerly chat with anyone who starts a conversation with you.
Take an interest in other people and what they have to say.
If you don’t have time to talk to someone, at least give them a
cheerful greeting.
Help people feel good about themselves
When it comes to this point, it’s less about actively trying to make people
feel good, and more about not saying anything that cuts them down. If you
purposely try to build someone up by cooing over every little thing they do,
it can seem very transparent, patronizing, and manipulative. It’s more than
enough to compliment someone or tell them you’re impressed by something
they’ve done when the opportunity comes up naturally. Being a decent,
friendly person who’s interested in others also makes people feel good
about themselves.
If you want to work on this point, you should put most of your energy into
not being petty and undermining. Perhaps you know someone who isn’t a
blatant jerk, but who’s always peppering their interactions with cutting little
comments. They’ll make snarky remarks, downplay or dismiss their
friends’ accomplishments, and make “joking” insults that are a little too
stinging. Maybe that person has social status and respect for another reason,
but no one would call them likable. When you act this way yourself, you
often won’t even notice you’re doing it. For example, a friend will tell you
they just took up rock climbing, and before you know it, you feel threatened
by the fact that they have more adventurous hobbies than you and are
brushing it off with “Yeah, that is a popular fad these days.” Likable people
aren’t immune to acting petty, but they do it much less often.
Bring something to the table in your interactions
Aside from making others feel liked and good about themselves, likable
people have traits that make them enjoyable to be around. They’re
genuinely funny, they have interesting things to say, they’re fun to go out
with, they’re good listeners, and so on. Again, this is subjective. A sense of
humor that’s hilarious to one group may seem too dark or corny to another.
One person may find a certain opinion interesting, while someone else
thinks it’s pretentious.
You can become more likable by developing your social strengths. Maybe
you’re fairly funny, but could refine your sense of humor. Or maybe being
funny isn’t your thing and you could focus on having intriguing things to
talk about instead.
Have more positive than negative personality traits
In a chapter full of general points, this one is even more general than the
others. A likable person could be lazy at work and careless with money, but
when it comes to interacting with others, they show mostly good
personality traits. The socializing-related personality flaws they do have are
often milder. They also tend to be aware of their irksome traits and can put
a charming spin on them. For example, if they’re a bit opinionated and
temperamental, they can catch themselves at the start of a rant and poke fun
at themselves about what a hothead they are. They don’t randomly explode
at people with no sense of how tedious they are to be around.
It’s not practical for this book to list every possible good and bad
character trait or tell you how to overhaul your entire personality. All you
can do is tune in to your strengths and weaknesses, and work to change or
eliminate the traits that may be annoying to other people.
Avoid being labeled as “nice” in the bad sense of the
word
Likable people are often genuinely nice. They’re pleasant, friendly, and
helpful. Of course, that kind of true niceness is a positive trait. However,
some people get told they’re “nice” or “too nice” in a tone that makes it
clear it’s not meant as a compliment. What do people mean when they call
someone “nice” and don’t mean something entirely positive by it? The
word is used to describe several interaction issues:
“Nice” = “I don’t dislike them as a person, but they’re not for me”
“Why didn’t I invite Colin to the party? Uh, he’s nice and all, but he’s not
really my style…” When “nice” is used this way, it means, “I don’t hate
them as an individual. They seem pleasant and like they have good
intentions. They’re just not someone I’d choose to be friends with.” If
you’ve been labeled “nice” for this reason, there’s not a solution. It just
means someone doesn’t think you’re a match for them.
“Nice” = Bland
Someone may refer to a person as “nice” when they see them as being
boring and not showing much of their personality. “Nice” serves as a
description that’s used when someone can’t think of anything else to say
and they don’t want to be negative. If people see you as nice in the bland
sense, you should work on being a little more outgoing and forward about
what drives and interests you.
“Nice” = “Not enough of an edge for my tastes”
People generally like to hang out with friends who have a similar level of
“edge” to theirs. Someone may label a person who’s less edgy as “nice”—
too naive, wholesome, or innocent for their tastes (“She’s one of those nice
girls. I don’t think she’d want to go to the bar with us”). By this book’s
definition, someone has an edge if they’re willing to do “bad” things. Or if
they don’t do those “bad” things, they at least seem like they’re
knowledgeable about and not totally frightened by them.
Most people aren’t edgy to the point of being dangerous criminals, but
many have some edge because they sometimes do common, mostly
harmless “bad” stuff like
swearing
telling tasteless jokes
skipping classes
drinking or smoking underage
dressing in a way that’s offensive or provocative to some people (for
example, having lots of tattoos and piercings)
casually hooking up with people
coming across like they’re tough and willing to get into a fight
flaunting authority in small ways, like purposely skateboarding in an
area where they know they’ll get kicked out of
committing petty crimes like tagging a mailbox with a marker or
shoplifting some lip gloss at age fifteen for a cheap thrill
To be clear, you don’t have to do any of these things to fit in. There’s
nothing wrong with being innocent or a bit naive. Friendship circles sort
themselves based on edginess levels. The edgier folks find each other, as do
the less-edgy ones, and everyone’s happy. It’s a whole other problem if
someone has too much of an edge.
In general, though, it’s good if you can find a nice middle ground.
Practically speaking, if you’re unfamiliar with commonplace “edgy” things
or see them as more sketchy and dangerous than they are, it can socially
hinder you:
Even if you’re open to hanging out with run-of-the-mill, mildly edgy
people, they may unfairly dismiss you as a potential friend because
they see you as being too wholesome for them.
You may not get invited to slightly edgy events, like parties that
you’d have no problem going to, because everyone assumes you
wouldn’t be interested or able to handle them.
You may simply have the wrong idea about certain behaviors (for
example, you may see every last person who smokes as depraved and
evil).
You may become scared of things that are mostly harmless (for
example, seeing dance clubs as risky places).
Social issues aside, if you’re overly naive scummy, unscrupulous people
may use your innocence to take advantage of you.
To shed that naivety, you don’t need to do any edgy things if you don’t
want to. You just need to become more knowledgeable about them. You can
even do this by doing some at-home research. For example, if you’re in
college and know nothing about what goes on at parties, you could read a
few articles on the rules of common drinking games. Try to get a more
nuanced picture of behaviors you may initially have seen as completely
bad.
You can also try some edgier activities yourself. Don’t do anything that’s
so edgy it’s illegal or could otherwise get you in trouble. However, some
things that you may see as edgy are actually pretty harmless. For example,
if you’ve been really sheltered, you may see going to a bar as a foolish,
rebellious act. There’s no reason not to give something like that a try.
“Nice” = “Too much of a people-pleaser”
People-pleasers are often told they’re “too nice.” They engage in outwardly
nice behaviors, but their actions are motivated by a fear of being disliked,
along with poor boundaries and assertiveness skills. They’re nice when
other people wouldn’t be, and they show non-assertive behaviors, like
putting other people’s needs ahead of theirs, being overly agreeable, hiding
their true feelings behind a cheery mask, and having a hard time saying no
and standing up for themselves. Assertiveness is a big enough topic that
Chapter 23 is devoted to it.
“Nice” = “Being overly giving, thoughtful, and considerate to get
people to spend time with you”
Some people believe that being much nicer than average is a valuable social
commodity that will pay off in the form of friendships, romantic
relationships, promotions, appreciation, and respect. They’re often not fully
conscious that they’re operating on this principle. They may do lots of
unasked-for favors and always be available to provide practical or
emotional support.
People who are nice in this way are often disappointed, and they may
eventually become bitter when their giving style doesn’t translate into the
relationships and admiration they hoped it would. The fact is, most people
don’t place a huge amount of value on above-and-beyond niceness. It’s not
that they disregard niceness completely. It’s just that the majority of humans
are pretty nice (outside of rough dog-eat-dog environments). Being fairly
nice is a bare-minimum social expectation, and once someone meets that
standard, additional niceness isn’t given too much credit. When they’re
choosing whom to be friends with, people place more importance on factors
like having similar interests and values, sharing the same sense of humor,
and whether they have fun together. If a “nice” person does something for
them, they’ll enjoy it in the moment, but it’s not going to sway their overall
opinion on whether the person is desirable as a friend.
Not only that, but above-average niceness can be a liability. Extremely
nice, giving people may be taken advantage of. They may be looked down
on as insecure suck-ups who feel they have to buy people’s friendship
because they have nothing else to offer. They may be seen as lacking
judgment and common sense for being so loose with their time, money, and
emotional energy. Many people feel uncomfortable when someone gives
them too many unsolicited gifts and favors because it makes them feel
obligated.
If you’re “nice” in this way, realize that your preferred strategy for getting
what you want in relationships isn’t very effective. You don’t need to do a
one-eighty and become a complete jerk. Be as nice as the next person, or
maybe slightly nicer, but nothing more. Learn to draw people to you
through other aspects of your personality.
22
Being More Fun
FUN PEOPLE ARE simply enjoyable to be around. But fun has a time and a
place. If you’re at a party or in a joking mood, you generally want to be
around fun people and having fun yourself. If you’re going on a quiet,
contemplative walk with a friend, that same fun behavior probably won’t fit
the situation.
There are two aspects to being more fun. There are the behaviors that
make you more fun, and there are the traits to avoid that make you less fun.
This chapter covers both aspects.
Being more fun
As with likability, the traits that make people fun are general, and you can
fit them to your personality style. You can be fun in a more subdued
manner. There’s more to it than standing on a table with a beer funnel.
However, though everyone can be fun in their own way, this section uses
the meaning of “fun” that involves having wacky, entertaining, funny times
with people. If someone were to say, “My idea of having fun is to take an
afternoon to quietly contemplate my garden,” then what’s written here
won’t line up with their use of the word. If the outgoing type of fun isn’t all
that important to you, then you can skip this section.
Understand people can be in different social modes
Sometimes people are in the mood to have a low-key, cerebral, logical
conversation about politics, parenting philosophies, or their fears and
insecurities. At other times they want to goof around, make dumb jokes,
party, and blow off steam. Neither social mode is better or worse than the
other. They both have their uses and drawbacks. It’s the same as when
you’re not always in the mood for a heavy, depressing drama every time
you pick a movie.
Some people are in their element in serious, logical social situations, but
they don’t know how to handle it when they find themselves in a more silly,
party-focused one. They may feel out of their element or get annoyed that
everyone isn’t acting more refined. If you think like that, accept that not
every situation has to be solemn and intellectual, and work to embrace your
own carefree, immature side.
Some general ways to be fun
Purposely set out to have a fun time. Don’t approach the evening
with the mentality of “We’re just going to hang around and do
nothing.”
Joke around and be amusing. Tell funny stories, make witty
observations, do entertaining stunts.
Introduce people to fun new activities and situations. For
example, “Hey, instead of sitting around, let’s sign up to sing
karaoke,” or “Let’s check out the new stand-up comedy club.”
Help people have more fun than they normally do. Without being
pushy, help them move beyond their default level of reserve. For
example, “Hey, let’s go talk to those people… Nah, don’t worry.
They seem friendly. Let’s go.”
Be a little more spontaneous and daring than usual. Or to use a
cliché, say yes to more things than you normally would.
Take things a little further than you normally would. For
example, push your jokes into slightly more outrageous territory, or
take your friend up on that stupid bet when you typically wouldn’t.
Have little tricks and talents that make you more fun. For
example, knowing how to play darts or knowing a bunch of jokes or
card games can help you and others enjoy your time together.
Be less “un-fun”
The traits that make you less fun are more concrete and straightforward
than the abstract principles in the previous list. (Again, this section is based
around a particular definition of fun, and these traits aren’t necessarily bad
in other circumstances.)
Don’t be the person who never wants to do anything new or
much of anything at all.
Don’t be the person who wants to quit everything halfway
through.
Wherever you are, don’t just hang back and do nothing.
Sometimes you can’t help this if you’re shy or not interested in the
activity everyone is doing, but as much as possible try to stay in the
mix.
Don’t be too picky about what you require to be entertained.
Make the best of the situation, and don’t be someone who can only
enjoy themselves when they’re out in the perfect venue with the
perfect music selection, crowd, and drink prices. Don’t always think
it’s boring where you currently are and the fun must be at the next
location.
Don’t wait for the amusement to come to you. Make your own fun.
Don’t expect your friends to be responsible for your having a good
time. Don’t think things like, “I’ll only have fun once the band plays
better songs.”
Don’t be a downer by complaining too much about what you’re
doing or by bringing up depressing or heavy topics on a fun night
out.
Don’t be overly stingy with your money. There’s nothing wrong
with being frugal, but accept that some activities require you spend at
least a little cash to have a good time (for example, don’t go to an
amusement park then refuse to buy any ride tickets, play any games,
or get anything to eat).
Don’t see having fun as immature or beneath you. Everyone can
have fun. It’s not something only dumb, vacuous people do.
Overcoming traits that prevent fun
Being too uptight or serious and having fun don’t mix. You can hardly
relax, goof around, and have a good time if you’re irritated by everything or
everyone. Here are the characteristics of someone who is uptight:
having rigid, unrealistic standards about how you and other people
should act and how the social world should be (for example,
everyone should always follow the rules and be morally upright at all
times)
caring too much about whether people are acting in ways you view as
inconsiderate and thoughtless
getting irritated by everyday social annoyances that most people let
slide
thinking you always have to be controlled and proper and wellbehaved
seeing yourself as a refined, considerate, intellectual adult and
looking down on what you see as silly, immature behavior
not being able to laugh at yourself
Here are some ways you can lighten up:
Accept you can’t control everything
At the root of some people’s uptightness is a need to be in control and have
everyone act the way they want them to. You can become more relaxed if
you can let go of this need and accept that people are going to behave in a
way you may not like or expect.
Develop a more realistic idea of what to expect in social situations
Lots of slightly irritating, but common and unavoidable, behaviors and
events are going to come up when you’re socializing. Friends will be flaky.
Venues will be noisy and overcrowded. People will act crass and immature.
Minor rules and laws will be ignored (for example, people will litter and
play their music too loud at parties). Most people know these types of
things come with the territory and don’t let themselves be too bothered by
them. If you’re more socially inexperienced, the same things can really irk
you, because you have the false expectation that a situation should go a
certain way, and then feel upset when people “ruin” it.
Try not to take yourself too seriously
It’s okay to be a normal dopey human, and it’s fine do things like watch
dumb movies with your friends while gossiping and making lowbrow jokes.
It’s okay to have light, brainless fun. You won’t lose your Intellectual card.
No one will care. In fact, they’ll probably appreciate that they can let loose
around you without feeling judged.
23
Assertiveness Skills
ASSERTIVE COMMUNICATION is when you look out for or stand up for your
rights and needs in a self-assured, direct manner, while being respectful
toward the person you’re talking to. Assertiveness skills are often talked
about in terms of intimate relationships or the workplace, but they’re also
needed in lots of day-to-day social situations:
turning down drinks and letting people know you’re not drinking at
all, or any more for the night
declining invitations you’re being pushed to say yes to because the
event isn’t your style or you simply don’t feel like attending
leaving a party early when your friends want you to stay
having an opinion about where you’d like to eat or go out
turning down inconvenient requests for things like car rides, course
notes, or free tech support
excusing yourself from a conversation with someone who’s full of
themselves and not letting you get a word in edgewise
telling someone you disagree with them, whether it’s to express a
minor difference in taste in movies, or to challenge them on an
offensive view they hold
telling a friend it annoys you when they’re late all the time
sticking up for yourself when people take “joking” insults and
teasing too far
generally being able to put yourself out there, like inviting someone
to hang out or sharing your views with a group of people you’ve just
met
Knowing how to be assertive has many benefits. Your self-respect will
naturally be higher if you’re willing and able to look out for yourself, and
refuse to be put down or cajoled into doing things you’ll regret later.
Knowing how to be assertive provides you with a sense of self-confidence
and control. It makes your life more rewarding because you’re able to get
your needs met, go after what you want, and steer clear of situations and
activities that you don’t find enjoyable. It’s a trait other people admire.
Finally, if you want to live a less conventional social life, you’re going to
need to get the hang of standing up for what you want and resisting pressure
from other people. This chapter goes into detail about what it means, and
doesn’t mean, to act assertively, then gives some suggestions on how to
become more assertive.
Breaking down the definition of assertiveness
As this chapter’s opening sentence said, assertive communication is when
you look out for or stand up for your rights and needs in a self-assured,
direct manner, while being respectful toward the person you’re talking to.
Here’s that definition broken down further:
…look out for or stand up for your rights and needs… You, and
everyone else, have implicit rights in interpersonal situations, such as
the right to be treated respectfully
the right not to be used and taken advantage of
the right to say no and not be coerced into doing things you don’t
want to do
the right to feel what you feel, even if some people think your
emotions or reactions are wrong or irrational
the right to do things like form opinions, make decisions, set goals
for yourself and take action, and not have to justify any of your
choices to anyone else
the right to not be perfect, that is, you can make mistakes, say the
wrong thing, change your mind, or not know how to do something
Everyone also has various needs and preferences, ranging from what they
require from a friend to what type of restaurant they’d like to go to that
night.
…in a self-assured, direct manner… When you communicate
assertively, you’re open about what you want and how you’re feeling. That
doesn’t mean you have to spill your entire soul every time. You could be
assertive just by saying, “Hey, cut it out” in a tone of voice that shows
you’re serious, or by ending a conversation with “Well, it was nice meeting
you…” with a firmness that says, “I’m done talking with you now.”
…while also being respectful toward the person you’re talking to.
Assertive communication allows you to protect your rights but respects
those of the people you’re talking to. It’s different from aggressive
communication, where you look out for your own rights but trample over
someone else’s by insulting, threatening, or badgering them.
Considering the flip side of assertiveness: Passive
communication
The opposite of assertiveness is a passive communication style. That’s
when you don’t look out for your needs and rights, and people sometimes
unintentionally or purposely disregard them.
Facets of passive communication
having trouble saying no
not speaking up to share an opinion or preference when it would be
appropriate
going along with what other people want, even though you’re not on
board
being quick to say, “Whatever you guys want is fine with me”
committing to things you’d rather not do, and then trying to get out
of them later
not defending yourself when people disrespect you
easily caving into pressure to change your mind when you do speak
up about what you want
adopting a false easygoing, go-with-the-flow, helpful persona to
make it seem like you’re happy to put other people’s needs ahead of
yours
If you’re passive too often, and subsequently get walked all over, other
people’s disregard for your thoughts and needs will eat away at your selfesteem
and self-respect. A vicious cycle can start where people see you
being unassertive around others, so they figure it’s okay to treat you poorly
themselves (it’s not right or your fault, but it can still happen). Being taken
advantage of can cause resentment to build, which can result in passiveaggressive
behaviors where you act hostile toward people in indirect ways
(for example, subtly trying to undermine them or purposely being
undependable). Some people aren’t even aware of when they’re feeling
resentful and being passive-aggressive, and continue to see themselves as
laid back and giving. Chronic passivity can also cause you to try to get your
needs met through indirect or manipulative means (for example, rather than
telling your friends you don’t feel like seeing a movie, you agree, then try to
plant the idea of doing something else instead).
How to improve your assertiveness skills
You can improve your assertiveness through a combination of changing
your attitude and learning practical, effective assertive behaviors.
Believe that your needs, rights, and worldview matter
One big reason people aren’t assertive is that deep down they don’t believe
their needs are important or worth standing up for. They don’t have faith in
their own values, opinions, and preferences, and they let other people
override them (for instance, they don’t like nightclubs, but have swallowed
the idea they’re weird and antisocial for feeling that way, and let their
friends talk them into going). You need to develop a mentality that your
needs and worldview are valid and worth protecting. Here are some
suggestions:
Just hearing that your needs and views matter might be enough for
the idea to take hold. If you’ve unintentionally gone through life
assuming you deserve to put yourself second, learning about a better
alternative may make you think, “Wow, that makes sense. Why
haven’t I been doing that all along?”
Work on your overall sense of self-worth (see Chapter 8).
Make a list of your personal needs and rights.
Practice putting your needs and values first. Do fun activities that are
solely a treat for you and no one else. Shamelessly indulge in
interests that other people may see as lame or pointless. If you’re not
used to doing this, you may feel guilty or self-centered at first, but
with time it will feel more natural.
Question your beliefs and fears about what being assertive means
Reason No. 2 people have trouble being assertive is they have the wrong
idea about what it involves. If you have any of the thoughts below, you
need to replace them with more adaptive alternatives:
“Being assertive means being selfish.”
Alternative: Being assertive means prioritizing and looking out for your
needs in a healthy way. It doesn’t mean you have to become totally selfabsorbed;
you just can’t let other people’s interests run roughshod over
yours. Even when you want to help other people, you can’t do that to the
best of your abilities if you’re not taking care of yourself first.
“Being assertive means being rude and bossy and forcing my will on
others.”
Alternative: Forcing your will on others is aggressive, not assertive. A lot
of assertive messages can be delivered with a smile. You don’t need to be
cold and abrupt to do so.
“If I become more assertive, I’m going to have to constantly get into
battles.”
Alternative: Having assertiveness skills doesn’t mean you have to use them
all the time. If someone slights you in a minor, unintentional way, it’s often
easier to let it slide. Assertiveness isn’t the only tactic for handling certain
situations either. For example, sometimes it’s easier to get someone off your
back by changing the subject.
“I’ll hurt people’s feelings if I always have to be open and speak my mind.”
Alternative: Assertiveness is about being straightforward, but it doesn’t
mean you should pointlessly share every potentially upsetting detail. If a
coworker invites you to see their band, which you don’t think is very good,
a quick “No, thanks. I’m into different kinds of music” is all it takes to
decline the invitation without hurting the person’s feelings. If you suspect
even that will offend them, it may be simpler to go with another approach,
like making a polite excuse.
“People won’t like me if I’m assertive.”
Alternative: Someone who’s trying to walk all over you may not appreciate
it when you stand your ground, but overall, people will tend to like and
respect you more when they see you have a backbone and healthy
boundaries.
“People may react badly if I’m assertive.”
Alternative: Sometimes they will, but that doesn’t automatically mean you
did anything wrong. If someone has a tantrum because you don’t agree with
everything they think or they can’t impose their will on you, that’s their
problem. Sometimes to get what you want in life, you’re going to make
other people unhappy through no fault of your own.
“I’ll be more likely to get what I want with a more people-pleasing
approach.”
Alternative: Some people-pleasers tell themselves this, but deep down
most of them know their strategy doesn’t work and often leaves them
feeling used and unappreciated.
Practice being assertive until you get comfortable with it
Reason No. 3 people have difficulty being assertive is that it can simply be
scary and uncomfortable at first. To get used to being more assertive, start
by role-playing scenarios with a friend, support group, or counselor. In real
life, you can begin with situations you can handle and then move on to
tougher ones.
Know some techniques for asserting yourself
Knowing some basic assertiveness techniques allows you to deliver and
stick to your message in a calm, self-assured way. If you get pushback, you
can also avoid getting flustered and giving in, or getting angry and having
your communication slide into more aggressive, confrontational territory.
Say what you want in a confident, straightforward style
Once you’ve gathered up the nerve to do it, being assertive is pretty simple:
Plainly state what you want in a composed, self-possessed manner. You
don’t need to add a ton of explanations and justifications. For example, if
you’re at a party and your friends are bugging you to drink more than you’d
like, you can say, “No, thanks. I’m not drinking any more.” If you’re out
with a friend and they’re paying more attention to their phone than to you,
you can say something like, “Can you please save that for when we’re not
in the middle of a conversation?” Again, you don’t have to be
exaggeratedly firm and forceful. If someone is really stepping over a line,
that may be appropriate, but you can often be assertive in a friendly, casual
manner.
Use “I” statements
A standard piece of assertiveness advice is that if you’re asking someone to
stop doing something that bothers you, you should phrase your message so
it keeps the focus on you and how you’re feeling. That’s better than
attacking the other person, which violates their rights, puts them on the
defensive, and makes it more likely a pointless argument will break out. For
example, if your friend sometimes gets a little too cutting and personal
when they tease you, a textbook “I” statement could be “When you bring up
my personal flaws to tease me, it hurts my feelings and makes me feel
insecure about myself. I’d like you to stop.”
However, a lot of people feel “I” statements come off as forced and
unnatural. You don’t always have to use them. As long as you’re still being
respectful to the other person, it’s fine to make your message fit the
communication style you’d normally use with them. For example, if you’re
a 17-year-old guy asserting yourself to your immature buddy, you could say
something like, “Dude, knock it off. You go too far sometimes when you
poke fun at me.”
Employ the broken-record technique
A lot of the work of being assertive comes from having to hold your ground
if people push back after you’ve delivered your initial statement. They may
argue, pester you, question your character, get angry, lay on the guilt trips,
subtly imply they’ll stop hanging out with you if you don’t give in, or insist
you have no choice but to go along with them. It can be tough to resist all
the social tension this creates. The broken-record technique is to keep
repeating the same assertive phrase over and over again until they give up.
You’re giving them nothing to work with, so an argument can’t break out.
The best feature of this technique is that you don’t have to do any thinking
under pressure. You just need to repeat yourself.
Here’s an example set at a bar:
“Here, I bought you a shot. You need a drink.”
“No, thanks. I already told you I’m not drinking any more tonight.”
“Come on, don’t be so boring.”
“I said, ‘no, thanks’. I’m not drinking any more tonight.”
“I bought you this shot. You have to drink it. It’d be rude not to.”
“Feel free to drink it yourself or give it to someone else, but I already
told you I’m not drinking any more tonight.”
“You’re no fun. You’re dragging down my mood.”
“I’m sorry you feel that way, but I already told you I’m not drinking
any more tonight.”
“Ugh, fine. Forget it.”
Agree, but don’t give in
When you agree but don’t give in, you say you agree with the other
person’s arguments, but keep on point. Here’s the bar example again:
“Here, I bought you a shot. You need a drink.”
“No, thanks. I already told you I’m not drinking any more tonight.”
“Come on, dude. Don’t be so boring.”
“You’re right. I am being totally boring, but I’m not drinking any
more tonight.”
“I bought you this shot. You have to drink it. It’d be rude not to.”
“Yeah, I am being totally rude for not drinking the shot, but I’m still
not going to do it.”
This technique and the last one also work if you’re asking something of
someone else. State what you want, and then keep repeating it if they argue
against you. It won’t guarantee they’ll give you what you’re asking for
because there’s no way to perfectly control other people, but at least from
your end, you won’t let yourself get pulled off course.
Have a plan for the odd cases where the other person won’t drop the subject
Being assertive and standing your ground doesn’t mean you have to calmly
let someone debate your decision forever. If someone keeps pushing an
issue, you’ll need another response. If they’re really being disrespectful of
your wishes, you may need to leave or let them know they’re acting out of
line. If you have friends who repeatedly step on your rights even after
you’ve asked them not to, the best call may be to end the relationship.
Sticking to your assertiveness guns
You may get some resistance from people when you first start acting more
assertive. If your friends, family, partner, or coworkers are used to getting
what they want from you, they may not like it when you start sticking up
for yourself. They might make remarks about how you’ve become selfish or
rude, or ratchet up their pressure tactics. It’s not necessarily that they’re evil
and liked it better when you were soft and timid; it’s just that people are
sometimes thrown off by change and will unconsciously try to force you
back into behaving the way they expect. Although there may be a rough
transition period, you’ll eventually earn respect when you establish you’re
going to have more solid boundaries. If you lose the odd exploitive or
disrespectful friend, it’s not exactly a loss.
SECTION
3
Forming and Growing Friendships
In this section
Details on the basic stages of meeting people and making friends
How to make a group of friends
How to make friends in specific situations
Troubleshooting the process of making friends
24
Introduction to the Process of Making
Friends
HERE YOU ARE at the book’s final section, which explains how to make
friends, build a social life, and put any loneliness behind you. Even if
you’re the kind of person who’s happy to spend time on your own, you’ll
still feel lonely if your lower need for social contact isn’t met. Loneliness
can really eat away at your happiness and sense of self-worth. It’s
demoralizing to unwillingly spend that fifth Friday night in a row by
yourself. The good news is it’s relatively straightforward to learn how to
make friends, so much so that if you’re lacking the knowledge of how to
form friendships, you may see some results right away once you learn the
skills and start applying them. If you’re somewhat able to manage your
shyness and carry on a conversation, then you should be able to use the
ideas in this section to improve your social life.
When one source or another gives advice on “how to make friends,” they
approach it in one of two ways: The first is to focus on developing positive
personality traits that would make you a more appealing friend (being a
good listener, being loyal, etc.). The second is to explain the practical,
actionable process of meeting people and forming relationships. This
book’s previous section on conversation skills covered the first approach, so
this section focuses on the learnable, repeatable tactics. People who are
good at making friends tend to unconsciously follow the concepts this
section explicitly lays out.
The basic steps to making friends
The basic steps for forming relationships are:
1. Find some potential friends (Chapter 25).
2. Invite and make plans with those potential friends to do something
with you (Chapter 26).
3. Once you have some budding friendships, gradually take the
relationships to a deeper level (Chapter 27).
4. Repeat the above steps until you’ve made as many friends as you’d
like, whether it’s a handful of close relationships or a giant group.
People who have trouble with their social lives usually stumble on one or
more of these steps. This list seems simple, but each of the listed chapters
goes into detail about it.
Some things to keep in mind as you try to form a
social life
As with tackling anything you’re not yet good at, the process of making
friends will be easier and more pleasant if you go into it with the right
mentality and expectations. Know that…
Being lonely doesn’t mean you’re deeply flawed
Lonely people often see their sparse social lives as a sign of how broken
and unlikable they are. Loneliness is usually just a symptom of a lifestyle
and set of social habits that are not conducive to meeting people and
forming relationships. Everyone has the potential to go through a lonely
patch if they don’t carry out the behaviors that will let them make friends.
Someone who was well liked and socially connected in their hometown will
be lonely in a new city if all they do is go to work and then head home to
watch TV. Growing up, many people fell into their friendships without
knowing how it happened, and they aren’t sure how to deliberately create a
new social circle from scratch when they’re in a different environment.
Being lonely isn’t automatically a sign that you have a horrible, offputting
personality either. There are plenty of annoying individuals who
have big social circles because they’re good and active at the specific skill
of making friends. There are many pleasant, interesting people who are
more isolated than they’d like to be because they’re not as proficient at
those same skills.
Trying to make friends doesn’t make you lame, desperate, or needy
Many people want to make friends but worry that actively pursuing
friendships means they’re desperate or groveling. That’s not true. It’s more
of that emotional reasoning: Because you feel desperate about something,
you think it is desperate (see Chapter 5 for more about emotional
reasoning). There’s nothing pathetic about trying to make friends or taking
an interest in others. It’s an everyday activity that confident, sociable people
do. Even if the rare person does see you as desperate, you have to take the
attitude that it’s all about you and you’ll do what needs to be done to form
the relationships you want. Who cares if a handful of people think you’re a
bit too eager along the way if it all eventually works out?
Don’t handicap yourself by trying to hide your loneliness
Lonely people can get caught in a self-defeating cycle; they’re ashamed of
their loneliness and try to hide it, but that prevents them from doing the
things that will let them make friends. They don’t go to a meet-up because
it might tip someone off that they want a better social life. They don’t invite
a classmate out for fear of revealing they don’t already have plans. As their
loneliness gets worse, so does their need to save face, and they get pushed
further into isolation. In reality, no one can tell if you don’t have any
friends, and even if they know, they probably don’t care that much.
Everyone has times in their lives when they need to refresh their social
circle—they’re in a new city, they’ve grown apart from their old friends, or
their previous group atrophied little by little as everyone moved away or got
too busy with work and family.
If you want a social life, you have to make it happen for yourself
It’s essential to take initiative. The quality of your social life depends on
how much work you put into it. A key mistake lonely people make is they
passively wait for others to do the work of befriending them, then conclude
they’re flawed when no one ever invites them out. Sometimes people will
make the first move, but you can’t count on it. If you want a group of
friends, assume you’ll have to put in all the effort.
Don’t take it personally if people seem indifferent to you
This is related to the previous point. Lonely people often wonder what’s
wrong with them and why no one seems interested in hanging out. Usually
it’s nothing personal. Other people are often harmlessly thoughtless,
preoccupied, and locked into their routines. They’d be happy if they hung
out with you, but they wouldn’t think to ask you themselves. Sometimes
you have to take an interest in others and generally get the word out that
you’re open to new friendships before you appear on their radar.
There’s always going to be some uncertainty in the process
When you’re trying to form relationships with people, there are going to be
times when you’ll get unclear signals. For example:
You’ve invited someone out twice, and they’ve had other plans both
times. Are they truly busy, or are they just making excuses because
they don’t want to hang out?
You texted someone, and they got back to you a few hours later with
a one-word answer. Do they not want to hear from you, or is it just
not their style to message back and forth with their friends all day?
You always have to be the one to invite a new friend out. Are they
hoping you’ll eventually take the hint and leave them alone, or are
they just used to you always getting in touch first because that’s what
you’ve been doing so far?
If you’re prone to feeling insecure, it’s easy to assume the worst. You can
never fully know what someone else is thinking. All you can do is stay
focused on your own goals and continue to take steps that move toward
them. If you’d like to be friends with someone, invite them out a few times
or contact them to chat. It’s hard to draw conclusions from one or two
incidents, but before long their behaviors will reveal whether they’re going
to help you meet your goals or whether you need to move on to other
prospects.
Don’t feel that making friends is super tricky
If you’re inexperienced at making friends, you may see the process as being
more drawn-out and complex than it really is. Often all you have to do to
make a friend is meet someone you naturally get along with and spend time
with them enough. You don’t have to know them for months before
applying the “friend” label either. One characteristic of more social people
is that they’ll throw the word “friend” around pretty loosely when
describing their relationships, and it can become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
If you’ve just met someone, it probably won’t be a deep, intimate
relationship, but you can still have a good time with them as you get to
know them better.
Accept that it can take time
Under the right circumstances, you can build a new social life quickly, like
if you’ve just moved to a new city to go to college or if you join the right
club or team and instantly click with everyone there. At other times, it takes
longer for your social life to fall into place. It may take a little searching
before you meet some people you’re compatible with, and then, if everyone
is busy, it might be a few months before you’re all hanging out regularly.
Stick in there and don’t give up on anything too quickly.
25
Finding Potential Friends
THE FIRST STEP IN MAKING FRIENDS is to look for some possible candidates.
That’s not a surprising place to start, but it’s where some lonelier people get
stuck. They don’t put themselves around enough potential new friends. This
chapter covers the two main ways to find prospects: drawing on your
current contacts and meeting new people.
Draw on your current contacts
Drawing on your current contacts won’t apply if you’ve just moved to a
new area and don’t know anyone, but often you’ll already have the seeds of
a social life around you. You don’t necessarily have to go out and meet
dozens of strangers. It’s often easier to turn existing contacts into fullfledged
friends than it is to scrounge up new ones. You might already know
a handful of people who could end up becoming part of a new social circle:
people from work or your classes who you get along with, but whom
you’ve never hung out with;
acquaintances you’re friendly with when you run into each other, but
who you never see otherwise;
friends of people you know who you’ve clicked with when you met
in the past;
people who have shown an interest in being your friend in the past
but you never took up the offer;
people you very occasionally hang out with who you could see more
often;
friends you’ve fallen out of touch with;
cousins who live nearby and are close to your age.
Meet some new people
Getting more out of your current relationships can go a long way, but that
isn’t always an option. Fortunately there are countless possible places
where you can meet new people. Before listing them, here are some points
to keep in mind when starting the search for new friends:
You’ll likely have to force yourself out of your routine and make
meeting new people a priority. Some lonely people fall into a rut
where if they’re not at work or school, they’re comfortably settled in
at home. If that describes you and you want to make friends, you
have to shake things up and get out more. You may need to add some
more social hobbies to your calendar or push yourself to get out and
do things in the evenings when you’d normally be relaxing by
yourself.
You may have to try a few different spots for meeting people before
one works. Finding new friends is often one of those situations where
20 percent of your efforts will get you 80 percent of the results. You
may go to several meet-ups, classes, or events, and they’re all busts,
but then you easily meet a ton of fun people at the next one you go
to. Don’t get discouraged if you sign up for a club or two and don’t
see much potential in the other members. Definitely don’t universally
declare clubs “don’t work” as a way to meet friends. Just try different
ones.
Realize lots of places where you can meet people aren’t perfectly set
up to facilitate connections, and sometimes you’ll have to make the
best of the so-so hand you’ve been dealt. Don’t hamstring yourself by
looking for the ideal set of circumstances. For example, you may sign
up for some art classes and feel there’s not enough opportunity to get
to know anyone because students are always coming and going and
there aren’t a lot of chances to talk during the lessons. You’ll have to
decide whether the situation is ultimately stacked against you and
you should try elsewhere, or if you could make a few adjustments to
make it work (for example, showing up earlier to give yourself more
time to chat with your classmates).
Features of good places to meet people
Some places to meet new friends are better than others. The more of the
following that apply to a place, the better:
It allows you to meet people you have a lot in common with,
naturally get along with, and are the types of possible friends you’re
looking for.
It’s somewhere where the situation breaks the ice for everyone and
naturally gives them reasons to talk to each other.
It allows you to be a long-time member or a regular and reliably see
the same people several times so you can get to know them in a
gradual, low-pressure way. It offers more than a five-minute chance
to chat with people and then never see them again.
It has a core of regulars, but new people continually enter the mix.
Places to meet people
The following list offers suggestions of where to meet people, keeping in
mind the features listed in the previous section. The easier places are
roughly listed toward the top.
through your current friends, significant other, and other people you
already know
your job
school classes
if you’re religious, through your faith (for example, meeting people
at your church, temple, or mosque; joining an association for Sikh
students at your college)
a club or organization
a sports league
a recreational / hobby class
a volunteer position
if you’re a parent, through your kids (for example, meeting other
parents at a playground; the parents of your child’s friends)
through your living situation (for example, hanging out with your
roommates and meeting their buddies; inviting a neighbor over for
dinner)
your extended family (for example, hanging out with a cousin and
meeting their friends)
an individual sport where you can arrange to train with or compete
against new people
online, through sites like Meetup.com, or meeting up with members
in a forum you frequent
through a solitary hobby that you can make social (for example,
forming a book discussion group)
through having something to offer other people (for example, you’re
good at graphic design so you approach your student association and
offer to do their event posters for them)
a job where you get to be friendly with the public (for example,
working in a gaming store)
through any sport or hobby where people congregate at certain spots
(for example, a skate park)
bars or pubs (for example, showing up and playing some friendly
games of pool with the other patrons)
a part of town where people from your scene reliably hang out
crowded places (for example, a small bar with music, comedy, or
poetry readings, where someone may ask to sit at your table)
various one-off events, like a multicultural food festival
by chatting to strangers in public
How to find events and clubs to join in your community
If you’re looking for places to meet people, an underappreciated skill is
knowing how to find interesting events and clubs in your area. It’s also
useful when you’re planning events with people and want to find
something fresh to do. Most communities have more going on in them
than you may realize. Even when you believe you’ve found everything
there is to find, you’ll continue to discover new activities and be
surprised at how much you missed.
Change the range of your search area, depending on the size of your
community. If you live in a gigantic city, you may want to limit yourself
to just the downtown or your surrounding neighborhoods. If you live in
a really small town, you should look within your several-town region.
After you’ve established the area where you want to look for events,
here are some ways to find out what’s going on:
search engines (for example, “[your city] event listings”, “[your
city] dance lessons”, “[your city] softball league”)
event listings in newspapers, both mainstream and alternative
weeklies
event listings on classified ad sites
event listings on community center or community agency websites
event listing on your town’s official website
sites like Meetup.com
websites and social media accounts of venues, like concert halls
and artsy cafes, that hold events
if you’re in school, its listing of its clubs, teams, and organizations
walking around your city and keeping an eye out for things to do
(it’s funny what new things you’ll notice when you specifically
look for them)
flyers posted around the city
bulletin boards in grocery stores, coffee shops, bookstores, and the
like
libraries (to find out about their own events and to check out any
bulletin boards they have)
a specific organization’s website (for example, to find a listing of
local Toastmasters groups in your area)
travel guides for your own city
people you know (sometimes you’ll do all the searching in the
world, and then a coworker will tell you about a festival you
somehow missed)
Approaching and getting to know people
After you’re in a place with some prospective friends around, you need to
strike up conversations and try to get to know them (refer to the book’s
previous section for more advice on that area). Realistically, you won’t hit it
off with everyone you interact with, but if you’re in an environment that
contains enough of your type of people, you should get along with at least a
few of them. Maybe you’ll connect right away, or you may warm up to each
other through smaller interactions spread over a few weeks. Either way,
after you click with someone, you could say you’re now friendly
acquaintances or that they’re context-specific “friends” (for example, work
friends). The next step is to invite them out and make plans.
26
Making Plans with Potential Friends
AFTER YOU’VE MET SOME PEOPLE you click with, the next step is to try to
arrange to hang out with them outside of the situation where you met. This
is an important step and another one where lonely people sometimes slip
up. You can meet all the people you want, and they can think you’re great,
but if you don’t make any moves to spend time with them, you won’t form
many lasting relationships. Your potential friends will stay as the girl you
talk to in class, or the group you chat with at work on your lunch break, or
the guy you joke around with at your rec league games. Even if you get to
know them quite well in that environment, if you don’t take the relationship
to the outside world, it may vanish when the semester is over, they get a
new job, or the season ends.
This chapter covers how to make plans with people so you can hang out
with them and develop your relationship. It explains how to set up your
own get-togethers—with individuals and groups—as well as how to get in
on other people’s activities. It also touches on some important habits and
mentalities to keep in mind when it comes to making plans.
The ideas in this chapter are important for getting a new social life off the
ground, but they are also really useful for maintaining or growing an
existing one. When you’re good at making plans, you can really take charge
and create the kind of social life you want for yourself, instead of having to
go along with whatever everyone else decides. Being able to coordinate
plans is so powerful that even people who don’t have particularly
outstanding personalities can have busy social lives, just because they’re
constantly arranging one outing or another. Meanwhile, someone who is
more fun or interesting, but lazy about setting up get-togethers, may not go
out as much as they’d like.
Two useful habits
To up your odds that you’ll be able to successfully make plans with people,
get in the habit of doing two things.
Ask for people’s contact information fairly soon after you’ve met them
You may meet someone interesting, but you often can’t be sure you’re
going to see them again anytime soon. Ask for their phone number or email
address, or see if they’re on whatever social networking site people in your
area and age group use. That way they’ll be easy to reach if you want to try
to get together. Also, if they have your info, they can get in touch with you
if they want to chat or invite you somewhere.
Stay in the loop technology-wise
Events are often announced and planned through social networking sites,
and sometimes only through them, so join whichever ones your peers are a
part of. You don’t necessarily have to enjoy or use them that much, but at
least sign up for the social opportunities they facilitate.
Knowing how quickly you can extend an invitation
How long should you know someone for before inviting them out? There’s
no right answer. If you’ve quickly hit it off, it’s fine to invite someone out
right away. It’s also okay to have an initial good feeling about them, but
want to get to know them a little bit more before inviting them somewhere.
You won’t always have the option of taking it slow, though. If you’ve met
someone you probably won’t run into again, you can continue to get to
know them better through texting or social media, but for the most part, you
need to act on the lead before it goes cold. In these cases, you may have
enjoyed initially talking to them, but be unsure how compatible you’d be if
you spent a longer amount of time together. Again, there’s no right answer
about what to do. You could take a risk and ask them to do something,
knowing the chemistry may not be there. Or you could extend an invitation
only when you’re fairly certain you’ll have a good time.
Steps to arranging your own plan
There are only two steps to setting up a plan, though there are details to
explain about each: 1) coming up with something to do, and 2) making the
invitation.
Trying to set up one-on-one vs. group plans
For the most part, the process of setting up plans with people is the same
whether you’re inviting one person or a larger group. The main difference is
that group plans usually take more work to coordinate because you have to
find something that works for everyone. That will be covered later in the
chapter.
Deciding whether to have a solid plan in mind or make a vague
invitation and work out the details after
Either approach can work, though it’s better to come up with a plan yourself
and then see if everyone is interested. Friends take the loose, “We should do
something this weekend” route all the time and still manage to see each
other, but that method has more potential to peter out: You ask, they say,
“Yeah, that sounds good…” and then no one takes it further.
If you come to people with a solid suggestion, they have something to
react to. They’ll do one of a couple of things: accept it, express interest but
want to change some of the details, suggest an alternative, or turn it down.
Even starting with one or two details is better than nothing. For example,
“Want to see a movie next week?” is preferable to, “Want to hang out
sometime?” The specific film, location, time, and day are still up in the air,
but at least they can decide whether seeing a show seems like a good idea.
Step 1: Come up with something to do
One early planning roadblock some people hit is they have someone in
mind they want to hang out with, but they’re not sure what to invite them to
do. It’s also not uncommon for socially inexperienced people to say they
don’t even know what people their age typically do when they spend time
together.
Spending time with other people is always at the heart of hanging out
with them
Don’t think that spending time with someone is all about coming up with
the perfect event to attend. Especially don’t think that there’s no point in
being with them if you can’t come up with something spectacular to do.
When you choose to hang out with someone, the central reason you’re there
is to enjoy their company. Of course, it makes your time together more fun
and memorable if you see a band or go on a hike or whatnot, but that’s not
strictly necessary.
Inviting people to get together is often more about doing variations on a
few reliable activities than coming up with something incredibly original
each time. If you really like your friend’s company, then you can easily
hang around their house several times a week or go to the same rotation of
cafes or pubs with the just the occasional more exciting event thrown in to
mix things up.
Examples of activities friends commonly do together
Hang out somewhere, mainly to talk
chill at someone’s house
grab coffee
eat at a restaurant
get a drink at a pub
hang around downtown
sit around at a park
Wander around, also to talk
go shopping
go for a walk
keep them company while they run errands
See a show
see a movie
see live music
see a live comedy show
see a play
Play something together
play video games (possibly online and not even in the same room
together)
play cards
play a board game
play a pen-and-paper RPG
play darts or pool
go bowling
play golf
throw a ball or frisbee around
Do something sports-related
watch a game at home or at a pub
play a team sport together
do an individual sport side by side (for example, rock climbing,
skiing)
compete against each other in an individual sport (for example,
tennis)
train or practice for a sport
go to a game
Work on something together
work on something artsy or crafty, like rehearsing with a band or
knitting
prepare a meal together
work on a repair or building project
Get out in nature
go for a hike or mountain bike ride
go fishing
go canoeing
go boating
Party together
go to a bar or dance club
go to a house party
hang around someone’s place and have drinks
Try other one-off activities
visit a local attraction like an art gallery, zoo, or aquarium
go to a yearly festival or carnival
check out a trade show or convention
take a day trip out of the city
go camping
go on vacation together
How to narrow down what to ask them to do
What you ask someone to do will depend on what you figure they’d be
interested in and, when you’re first getting to know them, what you feel
comfortable with. It may seem natural to invite a potential friend over to
your place to watch a movie the first time you hang out. That may not feel
as appropriate with someone else. As a general rule, if you think you’ll be
fine making conversation with someone, then invite them to do whatever
you think will be fun. If you’re worried the discussion may not flow that
well, a more activity-focused outing is better. You won’t be forced to chat
with each other the entire time, and the activity will give you something to
talk about. If you’re not sure how well you’ll click with them, a group
outing is lower stakes. You’re not stuck with them one on one if it turns out
you don’t have much chemistry. Also consider how convenient the plan will
be for them, as well as their financial situation. For example, if you know
they’re broke and don’t have a car, don’t invite them to meet you at a pricey
restaurant that they’ll have to take the bus for an hour to get to.
Step 2: Make the invitation
After you’ve come up with something to do, you have to ask everyone if
they’re interested in doing it.
Methods of inviting people out
Whether someone accepts your invitation will depend on whether they want
to spend time with you, whether the proposed activity interests them, and
whether they’re available. It doesn’t matter if you asked in person, through
a text, or over the phone. Go with whatever method is most convenient for
you. However, group invitations are easier to organize through a single
email that everyone can chime in on.
The tone of the invitation
However you invite people out, ask in a non-pressuring tone that suggests,
“It’d be fun if you came, but if not, that’s cool.”
Examples of inviting a single person to do something
There are many ways you can phrase the invitation: specific; open-ended;
open-ended but somewhat specific; and immediate / spontaneous. Here are
examples of each:
Specific invitation
“What are you up to this Thursday? Do you want to get something to
eat after our evening class?”
“I’m going to go see (band) when they come to town on the 17th.
Tickets aren’t that pricey. Want to come with me?”
Open-ended invitation
“Do you want to grab a drink some time?”
“We should go snowboarding sometime this season.”
Open-ended, but a little more specific
“Do you feel like getting coffee one day after class?”
“Want to go hiking one Saturday fairly soon?”
If the person says yes to a more open-ended invitation, work out the
details soon after. One mistake is to get a yes and then leave the other
person hanging by not following through and arranging the rest of the plan.
Immediate / spontaneous
At the end of the workday or as class is getting out: “What are you
doing right now? Feel like grabbing a coffee?”
To a dorm-mate you ran into in the hall: “Hey, I’m heading to the
mall to get some stuff for my room if you want to join me.”
It can feel a little less nerve-racking to invite someone out spontaneously.
You know they may not be free right then, so it doesn’t sting as much if
they say no.
Examples of inviting a group to hang out
The group of people you’re inviting out could know each other well
already, and you’re trying to join their clique. Or everyone could be fairly
new to each other, and you’re trying to turn them into a new social circle.
Inviting a group out is similar to asking a single person to do something.
Some people find trying to organize a group event less scary, because if it
doesn’t work out, the rejection is more diffused. It feels like the suggestion
itself fizzled, rather than one person specifically declining to spend time
with you. Everyone wasn’t just turning you down either; they were also
saying they didn’t want to spend time with the whole group (you can even
phrase invitations as “We’re doing X. Want to come?”). Alternatively, some
people find extending an invitation to a group more stressful, because if
their suggestion goes nowhere, they feel like a whole bunch of people are
passing judgment on them.
Specific invitation
“Do you guys want to hang out at my place this Friday? We could go
out later if we feel like it.”
“Does everyone want to go to ’80s Night at (nightclub) this
Thursday?”
“There’s a fair coming to town this weekend. Who’s up for it? I was
thinking Saturday afternoon.”
Open-ended invitation
“Do you guys want to get together sometime soon?”
“We should all hang out outside of work.”
Open-ended, but a little more specific
“What does everyone think of getting coffee after line dancing
lessons one day?”
“Maybe we could check out that new Korean restaurant before we all
get busy with exams.”
Immediate / spontaneous
“Anyone feel like coming back to my place now? We could play
some video games or watch a movie.”
“Do you guys want to go downtown after class gets out?”
What’s different with group invitations is what happens after everyone
starts considering the plan. When you invite one person out, they either say
yes or no. If they say yes, then you only need to figure out the specifics
with them. When you invite a group, more work goes into getting the plan
fleshed out. Some people may say yes, some might say no. The plan may go
through a few different permutations before everyone agrees on it.
Inviting one or more people to do something with your existing friends
When groups are involved, you can invite a potential new friend to do
something with your current group of friends.
“My friends and I are going out on Saturday. Want to join us if you’re
free?”
“My buddies and I get together every Tuesday evening to play poker.
You should come out one week.”
If you don’t have much of an existing social circle, you can’t do this.
However, if you have this option, it’s probably the lowest-stakes way to
extend an invitation. You’re not inviting someone from a position of
neediness. You’re offering a social opportunity. If they say no, you can still
hang out with your other friends.
What if you invite someone out and they turn you down?
If someone turns you down, you may get confused because you may not
know where you stand with them. Most people find it uncomfortable to
directly tell someone they’re not keen on hanging out. They also don’t want
to make future interactions awkward by directly rejecting you. Instead,
they’ll make excuses, “forget” to reply to your written invitation, or vaguely
agree that maybe the two of you could do something some time, but never
follow up. Of course, these things could also just mean they’re genuinely
busy.
How many times should you ask someone to hang out before giving up?
Three times, maybe four if the invitations are spread out. You can ask a
second time fairly soon, and if they say no again, give them some space
before trying once or twice more. If you haven’t gotten together after that,
they’re either politely brushing you off, or they’ve shown they’re too busy
to have new friends. On occasion, someone will genuinely want to be
friends with you, but their life is hectic and they have to turn down your
invitations for legitimate reasons. However, after three rejected invites with
no effort on their part to arrange something, it’s likely they just aren’t
interested, and it’s better to put your energy elsewhere.
The exception to this guideline is when you’re extending low-effort group
activity invitations to someone you’re on good terms with and who comes
to your get-togethers, but only occasionally because they have hectic lives.
In that case, it’s fine to tell them, “We’re all hanging out at Tina’s this
Friday” for several weeks in a row without them attending because you
know they will show up every now and then.
Try to set up recurring plans
Usually once you’ve hung out with a person or group, you have to go
through another round of making plans if you want to see them again.
That’s hardly a terrible amount of work, but it can make you feel like your
social life is uncertain from week to week. You could try to set up a
recurring plan, like watching a movie at someone’s place every Wednesday
night or going out for dinner once a month. Often everyone is too busy to
establish an ongoing arrangement, but it’s great when you can set up these
reliable social activities for yourself. These arrangements take work to
maintain, so don’t take them for granted. Occasionally people will get
distracted with other aspects of their lives, and it can take some effort to get
everyone together each time, so be flexible about cancelling or rescheduling
as needed. These plans also work better when a larger group is in on them,
so that even if only half the members can make it each time, enough people
still show up for them to be fun.
Ways to hang out with people, aside from setting up a
plan yourself
This chapter just went into how to set up your own plans, and it’s the most
important skill because you have direct control over it, but you can find
other ways to hang out with people without doing much work yourself:
Be invited to hang out
It’s great when other people ask you to spend time with them, though you
should never count on it and always be prepared to take the initiative to
make your own plans. But when it comes to hearing about plans made by
other people…
Do your best to accept every invitation
If you’re trying to get your social life off the ground and someone invites
you to do something, do your best to go. Why turn down a chance to get out
there? After you have more friends and invitations competing for your time,
you can be choosier. If you’re more of an anxious or solitary person, it’s
easy to overthink an invitation and come up with reasons why it won’t be
fun. Try to work past those worries and go anyway. You can never be sure
how enjoyable something will be until you show up and see for yourself.
Sometimes you’ll have to inconvenience yourself for the sake of your
social life. You may get invited to a movie you’re not particularly excited to
see or be asked at the last minute to a party on a cold, rainy Friday night
when you were planning to go to bed early. Again, being in a social setting
outweighs these minor annoyances.
Most people will stop inviting you out if you decline too often. They may
have nothing against you, but the next time they’re planning an event,
they’ll think, “They’ve never come when I’ve asked before, so no point in
letting them know this time.” If you’re interested in an invitation but can’t
attend for legitimate reasons, make it clear to the inviter you want to hang
out with them and would if you could. The best way to show that is to
extend an invitation of your own fairly soon after.
Figure out what other people’s plans are and then hop on board
Many people consistently have things to do with their friends because they
regularly ask around to see what everyone is up to. They don’t try to initiate
their own plan every single week. If they want to go out on the weekend,
they’ll start pinging their social circle around Thursday and ask what their
plans are for Friday night and the weekend. If they hear something they
like, they’ll get on board. If no one has solid plans yet, but some people are
interested in doing something, the “asking around” conversation provides a
starting point for figuring out what they could do together (for example,
“We could have a barbecue at the park like Morgan was talking about the
other day”). Also, asking around is a good way to take initiative, show
you’re interested in spending time with people, and generally stay on a
group’s radar.
Inviting yourself to social events
A tricky aspect of getting on board with other people’s plans is inviting
yourself to a get-together when you’re not sure if you’d be welcome.
The key thing to know is that on occasion it is okay to invite yourself.
Sometimes you won’t get an invitation, but if you ask if you can come
along, everyone will be fine with it. In the end, you’ll have to use your
judgment about whether you should try for an invite, but here are some
broad guidelines:
When you ask if you can come, always speak in a casual, nonpressuring
way (for example, “You’re going to a party tomorrow?
Seems fun. Is that something I could show up to? No worries if
you guys are trying to keep it small”).
Generally, don’t invite yourself to events like dinner parties or
cottage weekends where the host is putting in a lot of work and
has limited space or resources. An extra person may
inconvenience them.
“The more, the merrier” drop-in-type plans like parties or pub
nights are safer bets. Some get-togethers also have an unspoken
open invitation, like a group of coworkers who go for drinks after
work every Thursday.
Consider the other people who are going. Are they are a loose,
cheerful group of friends who are open to hanging out with
anyone? Are they a pair of closed-off couples who want to spend
quality time together?
If you know who the organizer is, consider their personality. Are
they a stickler for rules and etiquette, and protective of their social
circle, or are they easygoing and eager to have new people
around?
There’s always a risk of coming off as rude, presumptuous, or needy
when you try to invite yourself to an event. However, sometimes the risk
is worth it. If you really, really want to attend a get-together, you may
not mind if you’re not entirely slick about how you get there.
Hear about someone else’s plan, and then help build on it
This is similar to setting up a plan yourself, but some of the steps have
already been taken care of for you. For example, someone in your
gardening club suggests you all see a movie next weekend, and everyone
expresses interest in the moment, but no one follows up. If you pick it up
from there, it should be relatively easy to finish putting together the outing.
Mentalities to keep in mind about making plans
Now you know the basics of how to arrange to hang out with people. Here’s
yet another list of mentalities that will make the process go more smoothly
for you.
Accept that making plans can take work at times
It’s fairly easy and satisfying to get a text or call out of the blue asking if
you want to go to dinner with six friends on a particular date at a particular
time at a particular location. It’s a lot harder to set up that get-together
yourself. Making your own plans can be hard because you have to:
Deal with any fear of rejection about inviting people out.
Figure out what to do.
Research the plan (for example, looking up restaurant menus or
movie times, calling around to see what bars are showing a match on
TV, staying on top of what attractions are coming to town).
Ask everyone to attend.
Adjust the plan so it works for everybody. This is often the lengthiest
step. Sometimes no agreement is reached, and you have to try again
later.
Spend time persuading people to attend or not bail at the last second
(“Ah, come on, you’ve studied for the exam all day. It’s fine to come
out and blow off some steam for a few hours”).
Set up things necessary for the plan to happen (for example, making
reservations, buying food and drinks for a party, booking a camping
site).
If coordinating plans seems like a big hassle, realize it also feels that way
for everyone else. Other people shouldn’t always have to step up and
organize things for you. Do some of the lifting yourself when you need to.
After people have accepted your plan, be open to it changing
If you’re arranging something with a bigger group and everyone’s agreed to
your plan, but they are still working out the details with each other, it’s not
yours any more. Don’t get too hung up on it going in one particular
direction. Be flexible and be prepared for the date, location, time, or even
every last detail to change, possibly multiple times. Also, expect aspects of
it to change up until the very last minute (they may even change on the cab
ride there). Obviously there are times when you have to be more rigid than
others, like if your favorite band is coming to town for one date this year.
But if you just want to get together with some friends, what does it matter if
you do it on Friday instead of Saturday? Or head out at seven instead of
six?
Also keep in mind that until you’re actually there with everyone, the plan
could fall through at any time. It may never get off the ground because
everyone’s schedules conflict. Or it could be canceled at the last minute
because two of the four people attending can’t make it after all. These
things come with the territory, and it does no good to be too tightly wound
about them.
Be tolerant of some mild flakiness
It’s annoying, but people can be flaky. They won’t respond to your texts or
email invites. They’ll agree to come to your party and then bail at the last
minute. They’ll show up late. You’ll drive yourself nuts, seem insecure, and
run out of friends if you get overly annoyed every time these types of things
happen. If a friend is consistently unreliable or they do something more
serious like stand you up on a one-on-one outing, then you should say
something or stop inviting them out. However, if you’re planning a bigger
get-together, it’s usually a given that not everyone who says they’ll show up
will actually be there. Make the best of it with the people who do attend.
For larger activities, don’t get too hung up on certain people attending
Once a certain number of people are involved, getting the event off the
ground takes precedence over every last person being able to make it or
guaranteeing certain people show up (unless it’s for something like their
own birthday party, of course). People have stuff going on in their lives, and
it’s not realistic to think every last person will be free on a certain date. If
you try to set up the plan so everyone can show up, it will probably keep
getting put off for a perfect time until it’s eventually forgotten about.
27
Deepening New Friendships
NOT EVERY FRIENDSHIP you have has to be really close. People are often
happy to have some friends who are lighter activity or partying buddies.
However, we usually need at least one of our friendships to be more deep
and intimate. This chapter lays out the factors that lead to friendships
becoming closer. The concepts described below often happen automatically
as a friendship progresses, but you can take some control of your
relationships by deliberately trying to use these points. They mainly apply
to individual friends, but some of them also carry over to becoming tighter
with a group. Some things to know going in:
There’s no formula to becoming better friends with everybody you
meet
Not everyone you meet is going to want to hang out with you. And even if
you get along on a surface level, not everyone you hang out with is going to
become a closer friend. We’re just not compatible with most people in
terms of availability, interests, values, and what we’re looking for in a
friendship. Although you can try to apply the ideas below to your new
friends, realize they’re not all going to go the distance and become your
soul mates. That’s okay though, because people are often enjoyable to be
around on a more casual basis.
On the same note, just because you may be able to successfully apply one
or more of the ideas below to someone, that won’t guarantee the friendship
is going to go anywhere. For example, you may have a really intimate
conversation with them, but overall they’ll continue to think of you as
someone they run into every now and then. If you’re making an effort to
become better friends with someone and you get the sense you’re putting
more energy into it than they are, consider backing off and adjusting your
expectations.
Sometimes you’ll become good friends with someone pretty quickly; at
other times it takes a while
Many people have had the experience of meeting someone new and
immediately starting to hang out with them nearly every day. Just as many
have friendships where the bond grew more gradually. Neither progression
is better than the other. Friendships can get off the ground quickly in the
following situations:
when you just click with a person unusually well;
when you’re both at a place in your lives where you’re looking for
new friends (for example, during the first weeks of college);
when you’re both available and easily accessible to each other (for
example, you live in the same building and have lots of free time to
hang out);
when you fulfill an unmet need in each other’s lives (for example,
you absolutely love reading and discussing books, but none of your
other friends care much about them);
when you’re in a situation where the usual standards for friendship
progression don’t apply, like when you meet people while traveling
and feel like friends for life after knowing them for only five days.
Friendships can grow more slowly
when one or both of you are pretty busy with your day-to-day lives
and/or already have many friends who fill up your calendar;
when you get along well enough, but there isn’t that instant spark of
intense compatibility;
when you’re not actively trying to deepen your friendship with them.
For example, they’re on the periphery of your social circle, and you
get to know them better here and there.
It’s natural to feel a bit awkward and insecure as a new friendship
begins
There are times when you’ll hit it off with someone right away and never
feel uncomfortable around them. There are also those times where your
friendships will develop in a low-stakes, almost accidental way. However,
sometimes the process is more nerve-racking, like if you meet someone at a
one-off event and then actively try to start a friendship with them. Here it’s
understandable that things will feel uncertain because you’re not sure how
much they like you or if you’ll continue to get along and have things to say
to each other. It usually takes a month or so before you start to feel more
relaxed and secure about the relationship.
Ways to develop a new friendship
Every friendship is different, and not every point will apply to every type
equally. Some friendships are more about sharing and connecting, while
others are based around hobbies, joking around, and going out at night.
Spend more time together
Simply spending more time with someone is the backbone of becoming
better friends with them. A close relationship isn’t something that happens
in a few hours. You need space for all the relationship-enhancing things
covered below to happen. Time is an important enough factor that we often
become good friends with the people we naturally have a lot of contact
with, like coworkers, friends of friends, classmates, and team members.
With time, friendships can even develop between people who were initially
indifferent to each other.
Make an effort to hang out with them regularly
The main way to spend enough time with someone is to hang out with them
fairly often. Sometimes you’ll be in a situation where you’ll automatically
put in those hours. If not, you should try to use the ideas in the previous
chapter to organize get-togethers so you can continue seeing them. With
some people, you’ll quickly fall into a routine of hanging out all the time.
With others, you may only be able to get together every three weeks for a
quick bite to eat.
This step needs to be ongoing. It’s not about coordinating a one-time
hangout. It’s about putting in the effort to keep seeing them continuously
over a period of months. You might have trouble here because:
You’re a bit too busy or lazy, and don’t put in the work to see your
new friends regularly.
You’re shy and reluctant to invite someone to hang out because you
fear rejection or an awkward moment. This most often comes up
during the first few invites, but may subtly affect your actions later if
you believe your friend is “above” you.
You’re insecure and prone to thinking you’re not worth hanging
around and your new friends must not really like you.
You don’t have the highest need to socialize, and it causes you to not
initiate get-togethers as often as needed to keep your new friendships
going.
Spend one-on-one time talking with them
People can get to know each other and bond in a group setting, but often the
real opportunities to connect come when it’s just you and one other person.
Also, if you haven’t hung out with someone on your own, how close is your
friendship really? Many people have known someone through group
outings, but have seen a different side of them when they started hanging
out as a pair. They’ll point to that as when their friendship really started to
develop. You could get that one-on-one time by arranging to do something
with them separately. You could also find moments to break off with them
from the larger group. For example, the two of you may be able to retreat to
the backyard to talk at a party.
Keep up with them in between hanging out
One thing that distinguishes closer friends from more casual ones is how
much they stay in contact between times when they hang out in person.
Good friends often keep in touch. More casual buddies think along the lines
of, “I’ll be happy to see them when we run into each other in person, but I
don’t need to keep up with them otherwise.” Especially if you’re not
hanging out with your new friends all the time, keep up with them in
between get-togethers. Send them a text making a joke or asking how their
week was, email them a link they may like, or call them on the phone to
catch up.
Take their response rate and their own efforts to reach out to you as a
gauge of how often you should be in touch with them. Some people are
happy to text back and forth all day. Others are more of a weekly contact
type. Of course, after you’ve established a certain level of friendship, you
can often get away with going weeks at a time without talking, then picking
up where you left off. However, you’ll only maintain the relationship this
way, not actively grow it. The problems listed as hindrances to hanging out
with a friend regularly—laziness, shyness, insecurity, fear of rejection—can
also crop up when it comes to keeping in touch (for example, you start
composing a text and then think, “Ah, I’m probably bugging her. She
doesn’t want to hear from me”).
If you do go a few months without talking to someone you know well, it’s
usually not a huge deal to get back in touch and catch up. There’s nothing
odd about dropping someone a line after being out of contact for a while.
It’s another one of those emotional reasoning moments where if you feel
awkward about doing it, you believe it’s an inappropriate thing to do. Never
feel you have to throw a relationship away because you went too long
without speaking and now it would be weird to get in touch. When you
contact them, just say you’ve been busy lately and ask what they’ve been
up to. If they don’t want to reconnect, you can handle it. It’s not like you
were regularly spending time with them anyway.
Have a good time together when you hang out
What a “good time” entails depends on what you’re looking for. It could be
an intellectual conversation over coffee, an afternoon working on a car
together, or a night out at the bars. You can help grow a relationship by
going out of your way to do things you know your new friend will enjoy.
As the last chapter mentioned, you don’t have to do something incredibly
novel each time. On the other hand, don’t fall into a rut where all you ever
do is sit around and be bored.
Learn more about each other and expand the range of topics you talk
about
When you’re not particularly close to someone, you only know their
standard biographical info, and your conversations often stay on a handful
of topics, like your shared workplace and a sport you both follow. We feel
closer to people when we know more details about them and can discuss
any number of subjects.
Open up to each other
Not every friendship has to include tons of intimate sharing, but in general,
people see their relationships as deeper and more rewarding when they can
talk to each other about weighty or personal topics that they don’t feel
comfortable bringing up with just anyone. It also feels good to know you’ve
shown someone pieces of your “real self” and they accept you for it, or to
connect when you realize you both share the same hidden quirk or past
experience. You should consciously try to steer your conversations with
your new friend to deeper territory if they aren’t heading that way on their
own over time. If your friend is the first to head in a more intimate
direction, don’t shy away. Check out Chapter 12 to refresh your memory on
self-disclosure.
Be a good friend in all the usual ways
Being a good friend is a broad concept that’s hard to sum up in a few
paragraphs. A friendship will grow closer if each person comes to see the
other as someone they can count on and who makes them feel good about
themselves. That means showing the standard traits of a good friend and a
likable person, including
generally showing that you like the other person and want to hang
out with them;
being positive and fun to be around;
being dependable;
being emotionally supportive;
being willing to go out of your way for them;
not gossiping or complaining about them behind their back;
not blabbing to everyone about things they told you in confidence;
not using them or taking them for granted;
not freaking out at them over little things or taking out your
frustrations on them;
showing good character on the whole. You can act awesome around
them, but if they hear that you’re a scumbag otherwise, they may not
want anything to do with you.
No one’s perfect, and no one expects their buddies to be, either.
Everyone’s also different regarding traits they think are important and the
flaws they’re willing to overlook. One person may primarily look for
friends who are entertaining to go out with and not care if they’re
unreliable. Another may see flakiness as a deal breaker and put a premium
on someone who will be honest with them and keep their secrets.
Have some adventures or crazy times together
Having a shared history increases the sense that you have a strong
relationship with someone. Even better is a history with some truly
memorable experiences. It gives you that ability to say, “Ha ha, remember
the time when we…?” Lots of people have memories of seeing someone, or
a group, as casual friends until they took that one legendary camping trip
together and started to think of each other as a tightly knit unit. An
adventure is some sort of excursion or experience that’s fun and out of the
ordinary. It doesn’t have to be a ridiculous drunken night if that’s not your
style.
Be there for them during their difficult times
People can bond when one of them helps the other. They can also grow
closer when they support each other through a shared challenge, whether
it’s being in a demanding graduate program, working under an annoying
boss, or living together as broke aspiring entrepreneurs. They can look back
over the relationship and think, “We’re pretty close. We’ve gotten each
other through some rough patches.” It’s harder to see someone as just a
casual friend when you’ve seen their vulnerable side, had them lean on you,
and empathized with their struggles.
As always, this isn’t a guarantee you’ll become closer, and you could even
come to feel used and unappreciated. But if the friendship is going in a
good direction, helping each other can strengthen it further. Although larger,
emotionally heavy life events lead to stronger bonds, helping a new friend
could be as simple as offering to give them a ride to the mechanic to pick up
their car or letting them vent over something inconsiderate their mom said.
28
Making a Group of Friends
MAYBE YOU HAVE NO PROBLEM making individual friends who you can do
things with one-on-one, but you also want a group of buddies to hang out
with. This chapter covers how to do that. It goes over the three main ways
to make a group of friends: 1) merging your individual friends into a group;
2) making one friend and then falling in with their social circle; and 3)
making a new group of friends all at once. The second and third methods
involve joining an existing group, so the second half of the chapter gives
some pointers on how to do that.
Once more, keep in mind the social world is unpredictable, and over the
short term, you’ll only have so much power to create the exact type of
friend circle you want. Even if you set out to become part of a group, it may
not happen right away. Here are more details on the three ways to make a
group of friends:
Merge your individual friends into a group
If you have several individual friends, how can you get them to start
hanging out with each other? First, you’ll need to arrange some way for
them to meet. You could try introducing them to each other one or two at a
time, perhaps by seeing a movie or going out to eat together, or you could
organize a bigger get-together and have them all meet at once. However,
there’s no foolproof way to ensure your individual friends will like each
other. Everyone hangs out with a variety of people, and they’re not always
compatible with each other, even though they all share the commonality of
getting along with you. You just have to put them together and see if it
works out.
One basic tip is to mention things they have in common to break the ice
between your friends to get them talking (“Bob, David used to work at the
same nonprofit you did”). If you’re introducing one friend to a small group,
don’t leave them to fend for themselves. To allow for the best chance of
your friends clicking, try to hang out with everyone on several occasions.
People often don’t have enough time to really learn much about each other
during one meeting. Spending time with each other over multiple outings
also gets everyone thinking along the lines of, “We’re a group that often
hangs out together.”
Make one friend, meet their buddies, and try to fall in
with that group
If you’ve made an individual friend or two already, you can try to meet their
friends and see if you can join that social circle. If you hang out with
someone enough, these opportunities will likely come up naturally. If not,
you can take the initiative to meet your friend’s friends. If you catch wind
that they do any kind of group activity regularly, you can ask to come
along. You could also try to meet them by planning some sort of party or
larger get-together. Here it’s also a good play to try to meet your friend’s
friends more than once so they have more time to get to know you and get
adjusted to the idea of having you around.
Make a group of new friends all at once
There are two ways you can do this. The first is when you join a preexisting
social circle at a class, job, or club. For example, you start
volunteering at an animal shelter and quickly fall in with a group of fellow
volunteers you see often. The second is when outside circumstances force
you and several other people, who don’t know each other either, to spend a
lot of time together (for example, you all moved into the same floor of a
dorm, or you’ve all started a job at the same time).
When you’re in these situations, try to organize a get-together that brings
everyone together outside of the context where you’ve all met. If you want
to make a group of friends in a work, school, or club setting, it’s also
important to be friendly with many of the people and existing groups there.
You can hardly create a larger circle at your job if you only talk to two
coworkers.
More advice on how to join an existing group of
friends
When people talk of wanting to join groups, they usually mean one of two
things:
They’ve identified a group they think they want to join, haven’t
talked to any of the members much, if at all, and don’t know how to
approach them.
They interact with the group at least somewhat regularly, but still feel
like an occasional guest; they’d prefer to be a full-fledged member.
Just like you can’t form a group of friends to order, there’s no way to
guarantee you can join any specific group. This subsection covers how to
join groups that you have some things in common with and who are open to
having you, not how to sneak into that one super-snobby clique. Some
groups are just going to be difficult to join because the members have
known each other a while and are reluctant to include new members.
Whatever the group you’re trying to get in with, try not to put them on a
pedestal. They’re just a social circle, not gods with the power to determine
your happiness. If you don’t become closer with them, it may be
disappointing, but there are always other prospects.
Depending on your particular situation and the group you want to join,
you may not need to use every one of the following steps:
Step 1: Make initial contact
This step may be taken care of automatically if you’ve been introduced by a
friend or your circumstances. If not, your options for making the initial
contact depend on the access you have to the group. Here are the two main
possibilities:
Approach 1: Introduce yourself to everyone at once
For example:
You work at a big company. In the cafeteria you notice a group of
coworkers from another department who seem right up your alley.
One day you ask if you can sit with them.
There’s a gaming store on your campus, and every time you’ve
walked by, you’ve seen a bunch of regulars hanging out and playing
a game you’re into. You walk in one day, introduce yourself, and
explain how you’re a fan of the game too and looking for a group to
play with.
It takes a certain amount of guts to go up to a group of people and insert
yourself into their conversation. You may worry it will come off as lame or
overeager. If you’ve seen them around for a while without approaching
them, you may also think they’ll see you as strange for only coming over
now. But if you’re their type and you come off as reasonably likable and
confident, it can all go quite smoothly. If it makes you too nervous, you can
always try the next option.
Approach 2: Get to know a few members, then meet the rest of the group
through them
Again, these are situations where you have to go out of your way to make
contact with the group. A few examples:
You’ve noticed a group you want to join in one of your university
classes. In a second class, it’s just you and one of the members. You
get to know her in that class, and after the two of you are on friendly
terms, you start sitting with the whole group in the other course.
You play in a rec softball league and have noticed one of the other
teams is made up of a group of friends whom you seem to have a lot
in common with. A few weeks later at a league-wide end-of-season
party, you start talking to one of them and seem to get along. You ask
them to introduce you to their teammates, which they happily do.
However you first make contact with a group, if you’re a good fit, this
step may be the only point of struggle. After you’ve broken the ice, the rest
will easily fall into place.
Step 2: Find a way to hang out with the group consistently and become
closer with everyone
Assuming you didn’t effortlessly become accepted as soon as you met
everybody, the work will then be in moving from “The group now knows I
exist and seems okay with me” to “I spend time with them regularly, and
they consider me a friend.”
Don’t get discouraged if things don’t go perfectly the first time
The first time you spend time with a group usually doesn’t make or break
you. People may form a rough idea of what you’re like after talking to you
once, but they don’t decide then and there if they want to be friends. They
usually have to hang out with someone a few times before they know how
the relationship is going to develop. Occasionally, your first meeting with
everyone isn’t super encouraging. Your interactions may have been a little
strained or inhibited, or you may have felt stuck on the sidelines despite
your best efforts to stay in the mix. It can be tempting to throw in the towel,
but give it a few more chances. Sometimes people get off to an iffy start and
then realize they’re more compatible than they first assumed.
Figure out how to get in on the group’s get-togethers
Sometimes people successfully make initial contact with a group and
become friendly with the members in a light, casual way. However, they’re
not getting in on the fun group activities that are one of the reasons they
want to join the group in the first place. For example, they may be able to
chat with a group of people in one of their classes, but not see them on the
weekends when they all hang out. If you’re in this situation, there are a few
things you can try:
As with making friends in general, you may just need to get on the
group’s radar as someone they could hang out with outside of the
situation where you all met. After you let them know you enjoy the
same activities they do, they may get the picture and start keeping
you in the loop (for example, “You all go out and try new restaurants
every week? I’m into trying new places too, and I’d be down to join.
I can even suggest some good spots”).
You could ask about more specific future plans and then politely ask
if you can take part.
You could try arranging a get-together yourself (see Chapter 26).
Even if everyone can’t make it, your invitation sends the message
that you’re interested in hanging out with them. For this suggestion,
you have to use your judgment about whether planning something for
the group would be appropriate. Some groups are fine with newer
members trying to make plans. Others are more established and set in
their ways and will tune out ideas from anyone they don’t know well
enough.
If you got into the group through one or two people, get connected to the
other members
Another problem people have when joining a group is they’ll start hanging
out with a group regularly, but even if everyone is nice to them, it’s still like
they’re perpetual guests of the friend or friends who initially introduced
them. Aside from spending more time with the group, here are some ways
to move beyond that situation:
When you’re all hanging out, take time to break away from your
original friend(s) and get to know the other members. Make it clear
you want to get to know everyone better and not just accompany
your buddy to the odd get-together.
Get the other group members’ contact info. Aside from allowing you
to get in touch with them and sending another signal that you want to
get to know the whole group, it also frees you from having to rely on
your original connection as your sole means of hearing about the
group’s plans.
You don’t have to become equally close to everyone or have them all like
you to the same degree. Although you want to get away from being seen as
the guest of one or two members, you don’t have to become best friends
with every last person in the group. As long as a group on the whole wants
you around, it’s okay if your connection with a few members is a little
undeveloped. In most social circles, even though everyone gets along, some
members are closer than others. If the group is big enough, there will be
subgroups within the larger one. When you’re new to a group, try to be on
fairly good terms with everyone, but also look for the handful of members
you get along with best. As long as one of the subgroups takes you in,
you’ll be seen as part of the bigger crowd.
Step 3: Put in your time with the group and deepen your relationship
with everyone
After you’re hanging out with the group consistently, becoming more
enmeshed in it is mostly a matter of time. If you put in enough hours with
them, they’ll naturally start to think of you as a member. You’ll get to know
everyone better, even if it’s only a group that gets together to party, rather
than have lots of intimate discussions. You’ll share some memorable
experiences. You’ll become familiar with their private jokes and get in on
the ground floor for new ones that develop. Mostly this will all happen
automatically, but you can speed the process along by consciously adapting
and applying the ideas in the previous chapter on growing relationships.
Understand that you may not feel like a full-fledged member for a
while
Sometimes when you join a group, you’ll feel like a full-on member right
away. Alternatively, you might feel like a hanger-on for a few months. That
doesn’t necessarily mean the group doesn’t like you; if some members have
known each other for years and years, they’ll be more drawn toward each
other and might unintentionally leave you out. Once you’re hanging out
with the group on a regular basis, you’re in. Don’t discount that and
convince yourself you’re still an outsider. Just keep showing up and doing
what you’re doing; over time you’ll get to know everyone better and
become more of a core member.
Accept that becoming part of a group doesn’t always work out
Exposure and familiarity generally increase bonds between people, but it’s
not guaranteed. Sometimes you’ll join a group, feel on thin ice the whole
time, and then eventually leave when you realize you’ll never be fully
included. You need to be willing to go through this uncertain, risky period.
Any feelings of being a second-tier member may only be temporary. If you
really feel yourself struggling, it may be a sign the group isn’t a good match
for you.
29
Making Friends in Particular Situations
UP TO THIS POINT, this section has covered a general structure for how to
make friends. Here are some additional suggestions for two situations that
people commonly have trouble with: making friends in college, and making
friends as an adult, after university, or when you’re in a new city.
Making friends in college
The college environment is one of the easiest places to make friends. You’re
surrounded by thousands of peers, most of whom are open to meeting
people. Of course, that statement can seem like a slap in the face if you’re at
university and struggling with your social life. Students have two main
problems with making friends in college:
They fell into their friendships in high school and don’t know how to
deliberately make new ones.
They feel like everyone effortlessly made friends during the first few
weeks of school, but they didn’t, and they don’t know how to form a
social circle after missing that window.
Making friends during day-to-day college life is mostly a matter of
following the concepts laid out in the previous chapters. Meet people in
your classes, at your dorm, through clubs and student associations, and at
any part-time jobs you may have. Take the initiative to invite possible
friends out, then try to continue to see them so the relationship can develop.
Of course, if you have problems with shyness or making conversation, you
need to put some time into tackling those issues too.
Suggestions for making friends during your first few weeks of college
When you begin university, you aren’t the only person who doesn’t know
anyone. Most of the other students have left their friends and family behind
too, and need to make new friends. Here’s how to more easily meet and get
to know them:
Realize pretty much everyone feels a little nervous, unsure of
themselves, and overwhelmed when starting college. Most people are
just putting on a brave face because they mistakenly assume
everyone else has their act together.
Get to know some people before the school year starts. If you go to
an information session in the months leading up to the first semester,
get people’s contact info and keep in touch with them. If your major
has a group on a social network, reach out to some of your soon-tobe
classmates through it. If you’re in town a few days before school
starts, arrange to meet up with anyone who’s also around.
If it’s feasible, try to get familiar with the campus and surrounding
area ahead of time. You’ll feel more comfortable once school starts,
and you’ll be able to start a few conversations by offering to help
other students find their way around.
If it’s a realistic option for you and you really want to get some
practice with the university experience, go backpacking in another
country beforehand and stay in hostels. The hostel life is similar to
living in a dorm, both practically and socially.
Go to as many Orientation Week events as you can. You’ll meet a lot
of people, especially ones from your faculty. The rowdy, partycentric
atmosphere of the first week isn’t for everyone, but there
should be some non–drinking-related events. If you’re not into
partying, you won’t be the only one, and you can seek out other
students who are on the same page.
If you live in a residence hall, get to know the people on your floor.
Go door to door and introduce yourself, or hang around the lounge
and talk to whoever comes in. Drop in to visit your neighbors on the
floors above and below you too.
If you live at home or off-campus, hang around school as much as
you can. You can’t meet new people if you’re always holed up in
your own place.
Chat to whoever you want to. The first few weeks are a social freefor-
all, and no one is going to look sideways at someone who’s being
outgoing and trying to meet people.
Realize it’s okay to tag along with groups of people or to go to
Orientation Week events alone. The group you’re going with
probably just met a few days ago, so it’s not like you’re intruding on
their clique. If you head to an event alone, you can start
conversations with whomever you want because the whole point of
them is for people to mingle.
One or two of your fellow students may be vague acquaintances from
your high school. If you weren’t that close to them back then,
chances are it’s not going to be any different now. You have many
other prospects, and it’s better to put your energy into pursuing them
instead.
Don’t give up if you haven’t found a group of friends after the first few
weeks
After the first few weeks of school have passed, you may think that
everyone’s social circles are solidified, so it will be harder to make friends.
Yes, the atmosphere where everyone is open to making friends with
everyone else dies down after the first month. However, that doesn’t mean
that every new social circle is completely locked. Groups are usually open
to new members who are likable and who bring something to the table.
More important, the social circles that people fall into during the first few
weeks of university sometimes don’t last that long. They can form because
everyone is antsy get into some sort of group and will link up with the first
batch of people they meet. In the months that follow, these circles can drift
apart as everyone realizes they aren’t that well matched.
Making friends as an adult, after university, or when
you’ve moved to a new city for a reason other than to
go to college
These circumstances are lumped together because they’re similar and the
advice for dealing with them is the same. In each case, it’s no longer as easy
to meet people as it was in school. You’re no longer surrounded by
classmates who have lots of time to devote to socializing. As people get
older, they become busier with their careers, families, and homes, and they
have less time to spend hanging out with their current friends or meeting
new ones. They also have higher standards and a clearer idea of what
they’re looking for in a new friend. This isn’t to say it’s impossible to make
friends when you’re new in town or when you’re in your forties. You just
need to work harder at it, and you shouldn’t get too discouraged if
everything doesn’t slide into place after a few weeks.
Get what you can from your job or existing contacts
If you’re lucky enough to have a job that’s a source of potential friends,
take advantage of that as much as possible. Do you have coworkers you get
along with, but whom you don’t hang out with outside of work? Maybe
they’d be up for doing something one weekend. Just because you’re out of
school, new to town, or older doesn’t necessarily mean you have no existing
social connections. Even if you’ve moved somewhere far away, you may
have a past acquaintance or relative in the area. Maybe you could meet that
old buddy for lunch and be introduced to their friends soon after.
Pursue your hobbies as a way to meet people
When you’re in university, you can meet lots of friends through your
classes, living arrangements, and part-time jobs. If you meet anyone
through a hobby, it’s almost a bonus. After college is over, your interests
become a lot more central to your social life. People who have a lot of
social hobbies have an easier time making friends. If they’re settling down
in a new city, it’s natural for them to join a bunch of teams, get involved
with a theater group, or start volunteering somewhere. Before long, they
have a social circle. It’s harder for people who have more solitary interests
like reading, watching movies, or going for long hikes by themselves.
Consider getting some more social hobbies if you don’t already have any.
You don’t need to totally overhaul your personality or all of your pastimes,
but tweak how you spend your time so you can meet as many friends as
you’d like. Do more activities outside of the house. Find a way to use your
existing hobbies to put you in contact with more people. For example, if
you normally exercise at home, join a class or running club. If you like
reading about new ideas, attend some free talks or seminars, or join a book
discussion club. If you like stand-up comedy, see if there are any Internet
meet-ups where fans can arrange to go to shows together.
Be more active about seizing opportunities with potential friends
When you’re in college, you can afford to be a bit lazy about making
friends. If you meet someone you get along with in one of your classes but
don’t pursue the relationship as hard as you could have, it’s not the end of
the world. You’ll probably see them again in the next eight weeks. And if it
doesn’t work out with them, there are tons of other prospects. When you’re
no longer in college, the opportunities don’t pop up as often. You have to be
a little more on top of things when it comes to following up with people you
hit it off with.
Sure, at your job or at the start of a league’s season, you can drag your
feet, but there will often be times when you’ll meet a possible friend only
once or twice, and if you don’t jump on the chance, you’ll lose it. A lot of
hobby-related venues like dance classes or rock-climbing gyms have people
who only drop in a handful of times and then move on. When you meet a
person you could imagine yourself being friends with and there’s a chance
you may not cross paths with them again, be more active about getting their
contact information. Then follow up on the lead fairly quickly.
Expand the range of people you could possibly be friends with
When you’re still in high school and college, you mostly form friendships
with people around your age and from a similar background. As you move
through adulthood, the range of people you meet and could hang out with
increases. Don’t be too quick to dismiss someone who’s older or younger
because they don’t fit what you imagined your social circle would look like.
Just because someone’s age is a decade up or down from yours doesn’t
automatically mean you have nothing in common, or that they’re silly and
immature, or stodgy and out of touch. Don’t assume someone with a
different background is from a totally different world and could never be
into the same things you are. Look at everyone on a case-by-case basis.
30
Troubleshooting the Process of Making
Friends
ASIDE FROM BEING UNSURE of how to handle specific situations like being new
in a city and not knowing anyone, other mental and practical issues can
hinder people from making friends: having various worries about trying to
make friends; experiencing life circumstances, like a lack of money, that
interfere with your social life; getting poor reactions to your friendly
overtures; and feeling iffy about many of the potential friends you meet.
This chapter gives suggestions for handling all of them.
Common worries people have about making friends
Chapter 24 covered two common concerns that arise when trying to make
new friends: feeling desperate when pursuing friendships and believing you
have to hide your loneliness. Here are some other ones. As with any
insecurities, being aware of and challenging the counterproductive thoughts
beneath them can help, but in the end, it may take several positive firsthand
experiences to finally get rid of them.
“I don’t feel desperate, but I’m worried about coming across as
desperate and putting people off.”
Alternative: No one will see you as desperate if you do typical friendly
things like starting conversations with people you don’t know, trying to chat
with acquaintances, inviting someone out, or texting friends to catch up.
You have to act blatantly desperate to be seen that way. Desperate acts can
include inviting people out after they’ve already turned you down seven
times; texting someone way more frequently than they text you; or telling
them how much their friendship means to you after knowing them only a
few days.
“It feels weird to ask around to see what people’s weekend plans are.”
Alternative: Asking around about others’ weekend plans is completely
normal behavior. If you’re already close friends with someone, you have an
unspoken okay to ask them what they’re up to or try to join a group outing
they’re planning to attend. It’s two equals sharing information and figuring
out something to do together. (Once more, it’s emotional reasoning to
believe that because you feel desperate about doing something that it is
desperate. See Chapter 5 for more details about emotional reasoning.)
“If I ask around to see what people’s plans are, I’ll reveal I have
nothing going on.”
Alternative: There’s nothing weird or rare about not having plans for later
in the week. Being open about not having plans is something people do all
the time, and they aren’t embarrassed about it. Their thought process is,
“Oh, it’s Friday, and I didn’t think to organize anything yet. I’d better see
what my friends are up to.”
“Asking around to see what your social circle’s plans are is fine if
they’re your friends. But I want to hang out with some people I don’t
know that well. It’d be inappropriate to ask them what they’re up to.”
Alternative: That may seem inappropriate, but you have two perfectly
acceptable options: 1) Take a calculated social risk and ask these
acquaintances what their plans are, even though it might not work out
perfectly. Be sure to ask in a casual, low-pressure way; 2) Play it safe and
get to know them a little better first, and then take a stab at making plans.
“Asking someone to hang out makes me feel like I’m ‘one down’.”
Alternative: If you invite someone out, it doesn’t automatically mean
you’re lower on the social totem pole; it just means you have something fun
in mind that you want to do and are trying to round up some people to do it
with. More popular people try to organize plans too. They don’t sit back
and wait for everyone to come to them.
“I’m really not sure if I know the other person well enough to invite
them to hang out.”
Alternative: Use your judgment. If you think you may not have spoken to
someone enough for the invitation to be justified, maybe get to know them
a little more first. On the other hand, you can sometimes become friends
with people faster than you think you can, and inviting them out can be one
way to do that. Also, think about whether you truly don’t know them that
well. That worry may just be your nervousness talking.
“What if people say no when I invite them out? That means they hate
me, right? I don’t think I could handle it.”
Alternative: If you invite people out, you will get turned down some of the
time. If you’re arranging a larger activity, it’s almost a given that some
people won’t be able to come. It’s often not personal. People may turn
down a plan because
they’re not up for the activity you suggested;
they just don’t feel like going out and want to have a quiet night in;
they’ve already made plans with other people, but would have been
up for it otherwise;
they have other non-social things they have to do;
the logistics of the event are inconvenient (for example, they’d have
to take the bus for an hour to get there);
money is tight, and they can’t afford to attend;
they don’t know anyone else who’s going and aren’t in the mood to
try to get to know a bunch of new people;
they like your company, but not in that situation (for example, they
like talking to you one-on-one over coffee but not going to bars with
you);
they have their own insecurities (for example, they’re older than you
and your friends and worry about seeming lame by tagging along
with a younger crowd).
Even if they turn you down because they don’t think the two of you are
compatible, everyone experiences that kind of rejection, and it’s something
you can learn to manage.
“What if I arrange something and only a few people show up? I’ll look
bad, and the event will be awkward with so few guests.”
Alternative: There’s no law that says all of your events have to be big or
get a huge turnout. Getting a lot of people to come out is often as much
about offering an enticing activity and being lucky enough to have
everyone’s schedules line up as it is about how popular you are. You’ll
often have an idea of what the attendance will be ahead of time, so you can
always postpone if no one bites when you first suggest the plan. If you
don’t initially frame the event as big, it doesn’t look weird if not many
people show up. If the event does end up being smaller, it can still be fun,
just in a different way than a giant get-together. You can always improvise
too; for example, “This party is pretty quiet. Let’s just go out instead.”
“What if I arrange something and no one shows up? I definitely
couldn’t handle that.”
Alternative: It’s rare to be left waiting for people who will never arrive.
More commonly you’ll get a bunch of last-minute cancellations. Many
people have had the odd plan fizzle out like this. It doesn’t mean you’re a
failure for all time, just that you should try again, and maybe change up
your approach by suggesting something that’s more convenient or appealing
to your invited guests. Most big plans end up with one or two flake-outs,
and everyone cancelling at once may just be an unfortunate coincidence.
However, if it seems like part of a larger pattern of your friends not
respecting your time, you’ll need to talk to them.
“What if things are awkward once the event is under way?”
Alternative: Being worried about uncomfortable moments is mostly runof-
the-mill anticipatory anxiety, and everything will likely go fine,
especially if you’ve previously had good interactions with everyone. If
things are awkward, it doesn’t mean you’re forever hopeless; you may not
be meant to be friends with those particular people, or you may need some
more practice with your conversation skills.
“I feel like I’m always the one arranging things with my friends. They
never invite me out. They must not like me.”
Alternative: It’s hard to read any one person or group’s mind, but
sometimes friends never show initiative because they’re a bit lazy and
disorganized about making plans; they’re really busy; they would suggest
something, but you always ask first; or they’ve come to expect you to be the
organizer.
“I feel discouraged. I tried to get some people to go out to a bar, but
hardly anyone came. Then Maria proposed the exact same thing a few
weeks later, and twenty people fell all over themselves to be there.”
Alternative: Worry about your own social life, and don’t tie yourself in
knots comparing your plan-making success to other people’s. Some people
will be more popular than you. It is what it is. What’s important is that you
have a social circle that makes you happy, even if you have to work at it a
little more at the moment. Don’t fall into black-and-white thinking where
you believe if you’re not the absolute best, you must be completely
worthless.
“My life circumstances are interfering with my social
life”
Many life situations, like living in a dull, isolated village, can get in the way
of your making friends. These unhelpful circumstances undeniably make
things harder. However, you probably can do at least a little better than you
are now, and you shouldn’t be too quick to throw in the towel or turn your
circumstances into an excuse. Overall, when faced with one of these
barriers, you have three long-term choices:
1. You can try to adapt to your situation and get more out of it.
2. You can wait for things to shift in your favor.
3. You can escape entirely.
If you’re not an adult yet, your freedom and choices are limited, and you
have to bide your time until more options open up to you. Even if you’re
stuck in a less-than-ideal situation, you can still use your time to lay the
groundwork for the future (for example, saving money for a car, or honing
your social skills for university while you’re stuck at home during high
school). Here are some suggestions for particular situations:
Living in a small, boring town
Make a real effort to find everything going on in your community, as
well as getting to know the locals whom you have the most in
common with.
If possible, get a car and see what’s available in neighboring towns or
cities.
If you really feel bored and constrained and like there’s no one worth
knowing where you live, the only real option is to move. That may
not be a possibility now, but it could be down the road if you save up
enough money to leave or arrange to attend university or take a job in
a far-off city.
Living far away from everyone
If you’ve decided that your far-flung location is social kryptonite, try
having people over. They may not be as reluctant to visit as you
think.
Hang out at the homes of friends who do live nearby. They may
understand you live far away and not care that they can’t go to your
place. Don’t feel you must have people over to your home in order to
have a life.
Hang out with people in spots other than someone’s house. The older
you get, the more possibilities open up to do things outside of going
over to a buddy’s place after school.
Be around people in organized settings such as lessons, clubs, or
team sports.
Try making some friends with the people in your area. Your social
circle doesn’t have to include only people from your school. Check
out what’s going on in your part of town.
Once you’re of legal drinking age, living far from all the bars and
clubs can mess up a night because you may need to cut it short to
catch the bus or train home. You can figure out ways around this:
Consider arranging to stay at a mate’s place, taking a cab home, or
trying to get your buddies to come to a more local bar and then crash
on your couch.
Living at home
Unless there’s something obvious getting in the way, like your
parents have forbidden you from having guests over, there’s no
reason to assume you can’t invite people to your place.
If hanging out at home isn’t an option, spend time with friends in any
number of other spots.
If you’re in your mid-twenties or older, don’t assume that living at
home automatically carries a stigma. Living with your parents is
normal in many cultures, and even in ones where grown children are
expected to move out, there’s an increasing understanding that not
everyone can afford to do so right away.
Living in a run-down apartment or neighborhood you’re embarrassed
about
Again, if doing things at your own place isn’t feasible, hang out with
people elsewhere.
Don’t be too quick to assume this is a mark against you. Most adults
understand that not everyone can afford luxury accommodations and
may have to live in a cheaper area to save money.
Do whatever is realistically possible to spruce up your home.
Not having a car or not being able to drive in an area where you need a
vehicle to get around
Don’t feel you must have a car to have friends. If you’re an otherwise
solid person, no one’s going to judge you because you can’t pick
them up or drive somewhere.
Get rides with other people (be sure to pitch in for gas on longer
trips), take public transit when you can, or take cabs. Arrange to meet
people at your destination instead of picking them up.
In the long term, prioritize learning to drive and getting your hands
on a vehicle.
Not having a lot of money for hanging out with friends
Realize many people, especially when they’re young, don’t have a
ton of spare cash but still manage to have a decent social life.
Hang out at friends’ places as much as you can, rather than going out
all the time.
Do free activities like going for a hike or attending a street festival.
Do inexpensive activities like seeing a movie, having coffee, or
visiting a local attraction on a day of the week when admission is
lower.
Eat at cheaper restaurants.
If you’re into drinking, drink at home before going out, rather than
paying inflated bar prices (of course, don’t put your health at risk and
drink too much too quickly just to save a few bucks).
Go to bars with cheap or no cover. Some venues don’t charge a cover
if you get there early enough. Learn which bars in your city have
cheap drink specials on various nights of the week.
If it’s feasible, get a part-time job. You don’t even need to work that
many hours a week if you’re only doing it for a bit of spending
money.
Being underage so you can’t get into bars, especially when your friends
are old enough
Look for all-ages events and venues.
Try to go to more house parties with your friends instead of going to
bars.
Just wait to turn the legal age. Everyone is too young at one point.
Being really busy
Purposely make time for your social life rather than thinking of it as
something you may get to if everything else is out of the way.
Learn to work or study more efficiently so you can free up some time
to go out.
Spend your social time efficiently: See your friends in shorter,
higher-quality bursts; catch up with several people at once; or
organize get-togethers that fit between things you already had to do.
If your hectic schedule is leaving you too tired to socialize, recover
your energy with well-timed naps or hits of caffeine.
“People just don’t seem interested in being friends
with me, and I’m not sure what I’m doing wrong”
Chapter 9 covered the issue of others not reacting well when you try to
speak with them. This trouble area is similar, but the impasse comes a bit
later. People respond well enough that you can talk to them for a while,
maybe even on a regular basis, but they don’t seem interested in becoming
closer friends. They may not take you up on your invitations, or they may
not invite you out themselves. They may chat with you if they run into you
somewhere, but the relationship never goes beyond that. Here are some
possibilities that may help you suss out where you’re going wrong:
Try making friends in a better way
Talk to people first, instead of expecting them to come to you.
Go beyond greeting people and exchanging some quick pleasantries;
don’t expect them to take over from there.
Have longer conversations with people and invite them out, instead
of expecting them to invite you out.
Don’t think you just have to perform certain social “moves,” like
taking an interest in people, and then everyone will instantly want to
be friends with you.
Accept people’s invitations. If people have invited you out a few
times, but you never accepted, they’ve likely given up on you.
Get better at making plans. Instead of, say, inviting people out at the
last second to events that aren’t really their style, consider their
interests and ask them to do something a few days in advance.
Keep trying. Don’t be too quick to give up after the first setback
(“She said she was too busy to get together on Friday. She must hate
me. No point in trying again”).
The other people aren’t interested in being friends with you
Something many lonely people need to do is to take more initiative to
actively build a social circle for themselves. That advice only goes so far,
though. Just because you put effort into trying to be friends with people
doesn’t mean it’s always going to work out. Here are a few reasons your
friendship prospects may not be keen on being buddies:
You’re not the ideal type of friend for the type of people you usually
approach. Some people mainly try to befriend stereotypically popular
or high-status types, even though they have little in common with
them.
You’re making an interaction mistake of some sort that doesn’t put
people off immediately, but makes them unsure about getting to
know you better.
You don’t seem to enjoy the same activities your potential friends
enjoy.
Someone hung out with you a few times, but eventually decided the
two of you aren’t compatible.
The people you’re pursuing are your coworkers or classmates, and
they aren’t interested in being friends with anyone they meet at work
or school. They just want to put in their time and leave.
Again, the best way to get to the bottom of the issue is to get in-person
feedback on how you’re coming across.
“I don’t have trouble meeting people, but I don’t like
them”
Some lonely people are overly picky. It’s fine to screen out jerks or anyone
you have nothing in common with. Choosiness is a problem, though, if
you’re meeting people whom you get along with pretty well, but you’re
always left with a feeling of, “Meh, I don’t know. I think I could do better.”
Studies have shown that lonely people tend to be more negative about
others in general. Although people with this problem may be somewhat
choosy to begin with, the trait is mainly a side effect of loneliness. Being
lonely in the longer term naturally makes people unhappy, which can sour
the way they view their interactions. It also makes them pessimistic and
self-protective. They unconsciously think, “This isn’t going to work out, so
I won’t let it get off the ground to begin with.” They reject people before
they can be rejected.
If you’re really lonely, your initial goal should be to get some sort of
social life going. As long as your potential friends aren’t a total mismatch,
consciously try to override your pickiness and hang out with anyone whom
you get along with and who seems interested in spending time with you.
Become friends with them first, and then decide if you want to continue the
relationship. If you’re too choosy, you can come up with reasons not to
befriend just about anyone ahead of time. But if you push through your
pickiness and start hanging out with someone, you’ll often find you like
their company, even if they didn’t seem ideal on paper.
The first people you meet may not be your ideal friends, but the benefits
of having a social life outweigh that. At the very least, it’s easier to make
more friends when you already have a few. You’ll feel more confident about
your social situation and be able to meet more people through your existing
friends. Also, if you’re forming your first-ever group of friends, you
probably don’t completely know what you like or want in that kind of
relationship. You have to see firsthand what different types of people are
like in a friend capacity. When your social life and friend-making skills are
more established, then you can raise your standards.
Be especially cautious about rejecting people you really click with who
don’t fit the stereotypical image of a popular person. If you’re insecure, you
may reject them because you’re overly concerned with how your friendship
comes across to other people. You may also feel put off because you see
traits in them, like being shy or having esoteric hobbies, that you’re
uncomfortable with in yourself. These relationships can teach you that
spending time with a person you really get along with is more important
and fulfilling than having a social circle that outsiders approve of. If your
new friend is comfortable with the acceptable-but-sometimesmisunderstood
traits you share, their attitude may rub off on you. If they
have some negative facets to their personality, which you also have and feel
insecure about, you may become more at peace with these traits when you
can see they’re just one part of your otherwise solid new friend.
“I find it hard to make friends because I don’t relate
to the mentality and interests of most people”
Although not every less socially successful person feels alienated because
they don’t have the same interests as other people, it’s not an incredibly rare
issue either. In general, they typically feel most people are more shallow
and superficial than they are. They have a distaste for seemingly popular
interests like sports, celebrity gossip, trashy TV, fashion, drinking, and
nightclubs, and see them as a sign of how much distance there is between
them and the average vapid person. This sense of disconnect has
consequences:
It is harder to form relationships when you don’t relate to the things
many people are into. Some interactions won’t go well to begin with.
A promising conversation may stall when you reply that you don’t
follow sports. You may be unfairly judged for not drinking. If you
meet someone you click with, a wedge may appear when it becomes
clear their first-choice activity every weekend is to go clubbing.
You may become too choosy and write off potential friends because
you’re quick to judge them as vacuous.
Your feelings may translate into bitter and misanthropic behavior.
Your sense of being different from everyone may morph into an
arrogant belief that you’re on a higher level than all the mindless
sheep. Those feelings of false superiority may stay in your head as
nothing more than an ego-protecting way to reframe your loneliness.
Of course, if they appear as outward arrogance, that will put
everyone off.
Here’s how you can handle a sense of alienation:
More than anything else, look for people who do think like you. They
are out there. Plenty of people are intellectual or indifferent to sports
or not into getting plastered. You can have a satisfying social life and
never get drunk or go to a loud, flashy nightclub.
Be willing to give people more of a chance. Many of them aren’t as
shallow as they seem if you can look past the surface impression they
create.
Try to soften your aversion to the activities you have a chip on your
shoulder about. You don’t have to love them, and you definitely don’t
have to do them, but work not to have such a hostile perception of
them. It doesn’t do you any favors to carry that kind of resentment
around.
Stick to your values, but be open to the occasional compromise and
generally approaching things in a less absolute way. It’s fine if you
don’t like getting wasted or going to deafening, tacky clubs, but it’s
less realistic to try to keep alcohol or nightlife venues out of your life
entirely. If your friends want to have a beer or two at a low-key pub,
that’s not so bad, and keeping them company there is better than not
going out at all.
To be frank, if you feel superior to everyone, you need to get over
yourself and develop a more humble, balanced self-image. Yes, you
may be a bit more intellectual and refined than some of your peers,
but it doesn’t make you better than anyone. Many of them aren’t
nearly as dumb as you assume. Whatever your strengths are, you’re
not that much of a unique snowflake either. Being intelligent or
having discerning taste is great, but people with those traits aren’t
that rare. Getting more social experience will drive all of this home.
Here are a few more thoughts to support some of those suggestions:
Reasons people may seem more shallow than they are
Many people who seem superficial do have deep interests or tendencies.
The problem is that their surface features are easy to see, while their more
substantial traits are hidden. Here are some things that may make layered,
intelligent people come off as shallower at a glance, and cause you to pass
on them too quickly:
They belong to a social group that’s stereotypically thought of as
dumb and shallow.
They’ve fallen into a style of dressing that’s associated with shallow
people.
They have an accent or style of speaking that’s stereotypically
associated with less-cultured types.
They have a naturally crude, bubbly, or scatterbrained personality.
They don’t use proper spelling and grammar when they text or email
because they’re more concerned with speed over perfect legibility.
They tend to act loud and dumb when they’re drinking and having a
good time.
They’re in a place in their life where they want to do lots of shallow
things like partying a lot.
They’re capable of discussing heavy, cerebral topics, but have
learned that those discussions can cause arguments or hurt feelings,
so they save them for the appropriate time and place.
They’re intelligent, but not interested in stereotypical intellectual
topics like logical fallacies or Game Theory.
They’re content in life, and not in an “ignorance is bliss” way. Some
people think someone can only be deep if they’re angsty, cynical, and
preoccupied with existential questions.
Their thoughts are concealed. It’s easy to think other people are less
deep than you because you only see their surface behaviors. You, on
the other hand, have access to all of your inner thoughts, many of
which are profound and insightful.
They have good social skills. Some people go so far as to think that
anyone who seems comfortable with social interaction, and who is at
home in a group, is automatically a brainless follower.
In defense of “shallow” traits and interests
In moderation, shallowness isn’t inherently bad. If you’re vapid to your
core, that’s no good, but in reasonable doses, shallow things are fine:
Shallowness is part of the lighter side of socializing. Sometimes
people want to make childish jokes and gossip about celebrities. It
isn’t better or worse than being reflective and serious, just different.
Shallow things can be fun. Most people enjoy the odd dumb movie or
video game. Nothing wrong with that.
Shallow things can be a guilty pleasure. Lots of people realize that
some of the things they like are fluffy and trashy, but they’re
enjoyable and harmless, so why not?
Shallow people can be fun. Even if you may never want to have a
long, involved discussion with them, more vapid people can still be
entertaining enough to idly chat with or to keep you company when
you go out.
Some shallow things aren’t really shallow at all. Sports and video
games often get written off, but they’re full of nuance and strategy.
Real art, skill, and passion go into designing fashionable clothes.
Some TV shows or comic books can have deeper plots than many
people give them credit for at a glance.
Some shallow things have positive benefits. For example, a guy who
gets into natural bodybuilding so he can take his shirt off at music
festivals is improving his health in the process.
Some shallow things work for other people. Just because it may not
appeal to you, it doesn’t mean it isn’t rewarding to someone else. For
example, you may think a 9-to-5 job, a house in the suburbs, and 2.2
kids is soul sucking, but other people may find it fulfilling.
Some thoughts on developing a more balanced view of drinking
To be very clear, nothing in this book is trying to tell you that you need to
drink to be socially successful. If you have an overly angry black-and-white
view of the activity, it’s just trying to get you to see it through softer eyes.
If you’re not into alcohol, look for friends who aren’t big drinkers either.
If you are in a social situation where people are pressuring you to drink,
know you’re doing nothing wrong and use the assertiveness skills covered
in Chapter 23 to stand your ground. Feeling bitter about alcohol is
particularly a problem around college age when it seems all everyone cares
about is getting hammered. Realize that lots of people besides you aren’t
keen on drinking. The ones who are into getting wasted make a lot of noise
about it and claim a disproportionate amount of attention, but not everyone
is like that.
Drinking isn’t inherently bad. All kinds of people consume alcohol; many
have a glass of wine with dinner. Sometimes you can think of drinking, any
kind of drinking, as being more lowbrow or sinister than it is. It’s more
about how you go about it. There are different levels of alcohol
consumption. Someone who has a beer or two while seeing some live music
isn’t consuming it on the same level as a guy who gets blackout drunk at a
party and puts his hand through a window. It’s often not drinking itself we
feel negative about but the things it can become associated with. When
you’re young, underage drinking has all this baggage attached to it that it
doesn’t when you’re 45 and sipping a scotch in the evening. You may have
come to dislike drinking because it’s a favorite activity of a type of person
you resent.
It would be foolish to say there’s nothing wrong with alcohol. It has a lot
of potential downsides, from serious ones like addiction and drunk driving
accidents, to more minor annoyances like losing your phone when you’re
loaded or putting on weight after two semesters of partying. However, most
of the time nothing bad happens to people when they drink in moderation.
They go out, share a few pitchers, feel the effects, and then head home for
the night. Even when they get pretty drunk, most people still behave
themselves. They may be louder, sloppier, and goofier than normal, but
that’s about it on most nights. If you’re someplace where a lot of people are
drinking, it’s easy to spot the handful of people who are acting
embarrassing or being self-destructive, but for every one of them, there are
fifty who have their act together.
Some thoughts on developing a more balanced view of clubbing
If you can take or leave giant, gaudy nightclubs, you’re not alone. They can
be loud, crowded, expensive, and full of people who aren’t your style. Lots
of people don’t like them but still manage to have great social lives while
setting foot in them as rarely as possible. As with drinking, complaints
about clubbing are most commonly heard from people in their late teens
and early twenties, when everyone is most enthusiastic about going to them.
Most people who go to clubs are good, regular folk. If you’ve been
dragged to a club, it’s easy to think that everyone but you is empty-headed
and lives for that kind of scene, but a lot of people are occasional clubgoers,
who may have been cajoled into going too. The clubbing
environment also makes people seem more ditzy than they are. Who doesn’t
come across as more superficial in a clubbing outfit? Everyone’s also there
to let loose and have fun, so they’re not showing the more refined side of
their personality.
Don’t be too quick to dismiss specific aspects of clubbing. You may not
like dancing to thumping dance music, but that doesn’t automatically mean
everyone who does is a mouth-breather. Similarly, many people go to clubs
for face-value reasons like wanting to see their friends and cut loose after a
long week. Not everyone has a less-flattering hidden motivation like
wanting to get laid or soak up attention from strangers. Finally, not all clubs
are the same. When people first start going out, they often gravitate to the
biggest, most stereotypically club-ish clubs and mistakenly think they’re all
like that. You may not like huge venues that play Top 40 hits, but who’s to
say you wouldn’t appreciate a smaller venue that plays more alternative
music and attracts a crowd that’s more your style?
31
Looking Forward as Your Social Skills
Improve
IF YOU CONSISTENTLY APPLY this book’s ideas over time, your social situation
should get to a good place. You’ll be reasonably confident and comfortable
in your own skin. You won’t be completely fearless, but you’ll be able to
get through most social situations without feeling too shy or nervous. You’ll
be able carry on most conversations just fine, and you’ll know that if one
doesn’t go well, it’s not entirely your fault. You’ll have a social life that
works for you. What are some things you can expect as your social skills
develop in a positive direction?
Pitfalls that come with being more socially savvy
As your social skills get better, there aren’t any major pitfalls you have to
worry about. It’s almost all positives. One potential problem is that as you
expand into fresh social territory, you may develop some bad habits. For
example, if you previously nervously hung back in conversations but now
enjoy taking the lead, you may discover you tend to interrupt people or
make inappropriate jokes. You can catch and correct those mistakes like
you can any others.
Maintaining your progress
After you’ve improved your conversation and friend-making skills, the
gains are here to stay. When you have the knowledge about how to handle a
particular situation, you won’t forget it. It’s not like losing weight where
there’s always a risk that you’ll put the pounds back on if you aren’t
diligent. If you don’t use the skills for a while, they can get rusty, but it
won’t take long to shake that off. Practically speaking, conversation skills
are used so often in day-to-day life that you’ll be able to maintain them
without trying too hard. Your courage to put yourself in uncomfortable
social situations will atrophy more quickly if you don’t keep stretching your
comfort zone. Though again, it’s easier to get that comfort level back than it
is to earn it in the first place.
If you’ve always liked spending time alone, your new-and-improved
social life might dry up after a while. This can happen if you become less
intrinsically motivated to make new friends because you no longer have
anything to prove to yourself. In the past you were pushed by the pain of
wanting to get past your loneliness and social skills gaps. Now you may be
stuck in a rut; you know you could go make more friends if you really
wanted to… but there’s no rush. So for now you’re going to stay in for
another weekend and watch some movies. If you catch yourself in this
situation, it will be easier to get out of it a second time, once you reestablish
your motivation to meet people.
Your social life may also level out due to a course correction. When you
get the hang of socializing, you may go through a phase of going out all the
time and making lots of friends. You’re having fun using your new abilities,
making up for lost time, and proving to yourself you can do this. In time,
however, the novelty of having “bloomed” will wear off, and you’ll settle
back into your true, more low-key social preferences.
Coping with challenging times
Though your more polished social skills won’t tend to backslide much,
there are a few situations in which socializing may be tougher. The first is if
other aspects of your life get particularly stressful or difficult. All of that
extra stress and discouragement might temporarily make your shyness and
anxiety worse than normal. Second, your life circumstances may change
down the road, and you may find yourself in a spot where it’s tougher to
make friends. You’ll know the strategies you need to use, but the deck will
still be stacked against you. For example, you may move to a small town
after college and find it hard to meet people, as anyone would.
If you hit a stressful patch, give yourself permission to temporarily
function at a lower level. It may take time for your life to settle down, and
it’s not a knock against you if you feel a little more insecure or socially
anxious than normal during that time. Think of it as if you injured your
ankle and had to ease back on your physical activities for a few weeks—it
doesn’t mean you’re crippled forever. To take the edge off any stress you
many feel about socializing, use some additional stress-reducing techniques
from Chapter 6. Dust off any anti-anxiety or confidence-boosting principles
and techniques you may have applied in the past but haven’t had to use as
much lately (for example, you may need to go back to consciously
questioning your counterproductive thoughts).
When you find yourself in a situation that’s more practically challenging
than what you’re used to, be patient and don’t put pressure on yourself to
solve it right away. Take the time to try out different ways to adapt your
existing skillset. Accept that you may never get the same results as you
would under easier circumstances, and don’t hold that against yourself (for
example, acknowledging there will rarely be an opportunity to meet as
many potential friends as easily as you did in college).
What to work on next
It’s not uncommon for socially inexperienced people to think they won’t
feel happy and “fixed” until they’ve become incredibly popular and
charismatic. However, when they reach a functional, average level of social
skills, they often realize that’s all they need. If you want to try to take your
people skills to a higher level, nothing’s stopping you. As the beginning of
the book said, being charismatic is more about doing all the basics a bit
better than average than employing a set of special high-end techniques.
Basic social skills also provide a foundation for more specialized subskills.
If you haven’t started working on them already, you could begin honing
skills like flirting and dating, public speaking, sales, or leadership.
“Why hasn’t anyone noticed how different I am
now?”
When you set out to improve your social skills, you may have wanted the
validation of having your family or old high school classmates being
amazed at how much you’ve changed. You have to accept you may never
get that recognition. New people will tend to respond to the different you,
but people you’ve known a while will often see you as you’ve always been.
That’s partially because if someone has a fixed idea of what you’re like,
they’ll look for instances that confirm their old view of you and ignore
whatever doesn’t fit. Also, there may be a dynamic around certain people
where your changes can’t really show. When you’re having dinner with
your family, they won’t see how much more confident you are when
meeting strangers at parties.
Self-image
Our self-image tends to lag behind our current level of success. Even after
you have better social skills, you’ll feel like you’re still “awkward,” a
“geek,” or whatever label you used for yourself, for a while. You may even
feel like an imposter and worry that at any moment everyone will snap to
their senses and realize you’re really just a dork who’s faking it. You may
find yourself shoehorning the fact that you used to be shyer into your
conversations because you want to pre-emptively explain away any gaffes
you may make or because you feel it’s such a central part of your identity.
These feelings may never fully go away, though they won’t outwardly
affect you. They may also fade over time, and you’ll start to see yourself as
a regular person and not define yourself by your old interpersonal problems.
At the moment, your social issues may seem like an overwhelming, allencompassing
storm that’s ruining your life. If you work on fixing them,
there will come a time where all they’ll be is an off-handed, single-sentence
summary of something from your past. You’ll be talking to someone and
mention, “Yeah, I was pretty shy in high school and college… Anyway, as I
was saying…”

Appendix A:
Asperger’s Syndrome / Mild Autism
ASPERGER’S SYNDROME / MILD AUTISM is an inborn difference in brain wiring
that, among other things, makes socializing intuitively harder to grasp. It
also predisposes people to committing certain types of social mistakes.
Although Asperger’s syndrome has a big effect on the social abilities of the
people who have it, it’s a relatively rare condition. Most people who
struggle in social situations don’t have Asperger’s. This chapter briefly
describes the symptoms of Asperger’s syndrome. It then explains how
people with Asperger’s can adjust the way they try to acquire better people
skills.
Considering the diagnostic criteria for Asperger’s
syndrome
Below are the official criteria for diagnosing Asperger’s syndrome. They’re
taken from the fourth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. (The DSM-5 came out in mid-2013. It doesn’t include
Asperger’s syndrome, and instead absorbed it and a few other conditions
into a more general diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder. However, the
decision to take away the standalone status of Asperger’s was somewhat
controversial. Members of the public and many professionals still think in
terms of Asperger’s syndrome, so this book will use it as well.)
Even if you recognize some of your own traits in the criteria below, you
should never self-diagnose. Plenty of people have a handful of Asperger-ish
traits, but that’s often a far cry from having the full condition. If you suspect
you’re on the autism spectrum, you should see a mental health professional
who specializes in the area for a proper evaluation.
Not everyone with Asperger’s syndrome is the same. The condition can
vary in severity, and each person will exhibit a different mix of symptoms.
All the other facets of a person’s past and personality and interests will
come into play too. An outgoing “Aspie” from a poor, abusive household
may come across very differently than one who’s more naturally reserved
and from a stable upper-middle-class background.
DSM-IV Criteria for Asperger’s Syndrome
A. Qualitative impairment in social interaction, as manifested by at least
two of the following:
1. marked impairment in the use of multiple nonverbal behaviors such as
eye-to-eye gaze, facial expression, body postures, and gestures to
regulate social interaction
2. failure to develop peer relationships appropriate to developmental
level
3. a lack of spontaneous seeking to share enjoyment, interests, or
achievements with other people (for example, by a lack of showing,
bringing, or pointing out objects of interest to other people)
4. lack of social or emotional reciprocity
B. Restricted repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior, interests, and
activities, as manifested by at least one of the following:
1. encompassing preoccupation with one or more stereotyped and
restricted patterns of interest that is abnormal either in intensity or focus
2. apparently inflexible adherence to specific, nonfunctional routines or
rituals
3. stereotyped and repetitive motor mannerisms (for example, hand or
finger flapping or twisting, or complex whole-body movements)
4. persistent preoccupation with parts of objects
C. The disturbance causes clinically significant impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. There is no clinically significant general delay in language (for
example, single words used by age 2 years, communicative phrases used
by age 3 years).
E. There is no clinically significant delay in cognitive development or in
the development of age-appropriate self-help skills, adaptive behavior
(other than in social interaction), and curiosity about the environment in
childhood.
F. Criteria are not met for another specific Pervasive Developmental
Disorder or Schizophrenia.
Seeing the social difficulties Asperger’s syndrome can
cause
The official criteria for Asperger’s syndrome don’t capture the whole
picture. People with Asperger’s are interested in socializing and connecting
with others, but they often have trouble doing so. Until they’ve had more
practice and guidance, they tend to come across as stereotypically socially
awkward. Below is a list of common Asperger’s syndrome social
challenges. Although some of them are objective difficulties, others aren’t
inherently bad but can cause problems because they go against the grain of
what most people expect.
Problems with overall understanding of socializing
People with Asperger’s have an intuitive understanding of socializing that’s
lower than that of neurologically typical people. Most people, even if
they’re shy or less socially experienced, instinctively grasp many unwritten
aspects of the social world. Someone with Asperger’s doesn’t have this
knowledge and can struggle to comprehend or navigate situations most
people take for granted. They often compare their condition to being an
alien trying to blend in with the culture of a strange planet.
They’re also unaware of many social rules. This is a side effect of their
lower ability to unconsciously pick up unspoken guidelines through
observation and experience. For example, someone with Asperger’s may
make simple mistakes, like not saying good-bye to a friend after they’re
done talking to them, because they didn’t know it was expected. They can
feel uneasy in unfamiliar social situations because they assume there will be
hidden rules they’re going to inadvertently break.
They have a greater tendency to get drained by socializing because it
requires mental resources that most people’s brains can process on
autopilot.
Empathy
As Chapter 16 explained, empathy is the ability to get in touch with another
person’s perspective and emotional reactions. People with Asperger’s have
trouble seeing things from someone else’s point of view and adjusting as
needed. For example, they may tell someone a story, but not consider how
the listener isn’t familiar with the background context necessary to
understand it.
They also have a harder time recognizing and expressing their own
emotions. Asperger’s doesn’t turn people into emotionless robots, but they
may not always be totally plugged into how they’re feeling. If they are
aware of their feelings, they may struggle to get those emotions across.
Nonverbal communication
Asperger’s can cause difficulty reading and understanding other people’s
nonverbal communication. For example, a person with Asperger’s may not
pick up on someone’s bored facial expression and tone of voice. As a result,
they may go on and on about a topic the listener isn’t interested in instead
of changing the subject.
Their own nonverbal communication comes across as “off” to many
people. For example, they may have unusually stiff body language, poor use
of eye contact, an inexpressive face, a monotone voice, or a peculiar
cadence to their speech.
Thinking style
Individuals with Asperger’s tend to have a particular style of thinking,
which can extend to and affect many of their daily activities:
A tendency to be very literal and concrete in their thinking. For
example, you ask them if they could pick up some milk at the store.
They reply with a yes and go back to what they were doing. In their
mind, you asked them a hypothetical question about their ability to
get milk, which they answered.
A desire for structure, routine, and predictability, and trouble
deviating from their schedule and going with the flow.
A reluctance to disobey rules, and a tendency to get agitated and
come across as uptight when other people want to skirt them.
Difficulty compromising. They see many issues as black-and-white
and don’t want to budge.
Trouble planning and organizing their time.
Use of language
There are also recurring ways they tend to use and interpret language,
which can throw people off, or interfere with their ability to follow and
react to conversations:
A tendency to use language in a nontypical way. Examples include
being verbose and using a lot of big words, or speaking in an overly
formal and proper manner.
Trouble grasping humor and idioms. People with Asperger’s have
senses of humor, but theirs can be on a different wavelength from
everyone else’s. They may not see what’s funny about something
their friends are all laughing at. Because they think so literally,
figures of speech may not be immediately clear to them.
Trouble following the flow of conversation from one topic to the next
and seeing the hidden connections between subjects. For example, if
someone mentions a sport, and then the other person brings up
something a mutual friend did, the person with Asperger’s won’t
necessarily see the unspoken connection that the mutual friend plays
the sport.
Interaction style
The following are common features of the social interaction style of
individuals with Asperger’s syndrome. Their approach can make their
conversation partners feel uncomfortable or unsure of how to react.
A tendency to be very blunt and straightforward in their
communication. They’ll sometimes say things that other people find
inappropriate or hurtful, like casually referencing someone’s double
chin. If they’re bored in a conversation, they may simply walk away.
A tendency to “talk at” people and deliver monologues about the
things that they’d like to speak about, rather than having a
conversation with back-and-forth dialogue.
A tendency to value truth, logic, and accuracy. Aside from
contributing to their bluntness, this trait can lead them to feel
compelled to correct people on minor facts in conversations. They
may have trouble going along with the little white lies and niceties
people use to keep relationships on an even keel. Overall they can
come across as very detached and analytical, or anal-retentive and
tightly wound.
Trouble stating their thoughts in a concise, coherent way. They may
start to explain a point and then ramble or go off on tangents. This is
partially because they’re thinking out loud about what interests them
and are not considering what the other person needs to find the
explanation interesting and comprehensible.
Interests
People with Asperger’s often have special interests—subjects they’re
intensely focused on and devote a lot of their time to learning and thinking
about. Their interest may be a fairly common one, like video games or wine
making, but they can also be quite esoteric, like knowing everything about
medieval printing presses or collecting memorabilia related to an obscure
1970s country singer. There’s nothing objectively wrong with having one
interest over another, of course. The issues this trait causes are more
indirect, like if people think their choice of hobbies is strange, or they talk
about it at length to someone who isn’t interested.
Physical
Asperger’s leads to physical issues as well. People with it tend to be
physically clumsy and uncoordinated. They’re often bad at sports (and we
all know how rough it is for those kids in gym class). They can also have
sensory sensitivities to things like loud noises, particular smells or tastes, or
the feeling of certain fabrics on their skin. Places like nightclubs may
trigger negative emotions or reactions for them.
Any of the usual possible side effects of having social difficulties
No one—with or without Asperger’s—is immune to common difficulties
that can arise while navigating social situations. Other challenges people
with Asperger’s may face include
poor self-esteem
shyness and social anxiety
depression
bitterness at being rejected and misunderstood
Improving your social skills if you have Asperger’s
If you have Asperger’s syndrome and social difficulties, the best way to
improve your people skills is simply to focus on the areas where you’re
behind. For the most part, that involves standard things like reading up on
what to do differently and getting lots of real-world practice. However, you
can keep certain things in mind for your unique circumstances. Here are
some additional Asperger’s-specific considerations:
Don’t feel like having Asperger’s makes you a hopeless case
People with Asperger’s can develop solid social skills if they work at it.
There are countless examples of individuals who have done so. However,
learning interpersonal skills won’t come as naturally to you, so you’ll likely
have to put in more effort than a typical person. Give your diagnosis the
right amount of respect. Don’t use it as an excuse or think it dooms you to
failure, but don’t think you can casually disregard it either.
Make peace with your Asperger-ish traits
Many people with Asperger’s struggle with their identity. They might put a
lot of work into improving their social skills so they can pass as “normal,”
and their sense of self-worth may be very tied to how successful they are at
doing that. Although it’s understandable that someone would want to work
on their social problems, their self-esteem may be so wrapped up in getting
past their Asperger’s that they suppress some of their other traits, which
ultimately leaves them feeling unfulfilled. Don’t think of Asperger’s in
either/or terms. Work to move past the parts of it you don’t like, but keep
the good aspects. Many people with Asperger’s say they became a lot
happier when they accepted their obscure interests and quirky tendencies.
Work to address your legitimate weak spots and decide how you’ll
handle subjective social differences
Some of the differences Asperger’s causes are real social weaknesses, while
others are variations from the norm, but not objectively bad. Many people
would agree that not being good at reading nonverbal communication is a
handicap. Focus on identifying and correcting clear-cut issues, like having
trouble telling one facial expression from the next, making poor eye
contact, or tending to monopolize conversations.
For your more subjective differences, you’ll need to decide where you
want to land on the spectrum between being true to yourself and being
pragmatic. Some of these calls are easy to make. There’s nothing
intrinsically wrong with being into one hobby over another, so don’t waver
on that—though you probably want to learn not to go on and on about it to
people who don’t care. Other differences don’t have easy answers. What if
correcting people is important to you, even though some people find it
irritating? Maybe you’ll find a middle ground where you’ll be your factcorrecting
self around friends who have shown they’re fine with it, but hold
back around anyone you don’t know because randomly upsetting strangers
is more trouble than it’s worth.
Find people you can go to for social explanations and clarifications
The most wide-ranging way Asperger’s makes improving your people skills
difficult is in how it lowers your initial grasp of the social world. You may
feel some social advice, which an inexperienced-but-neurologically-typical
(neurotypical) person may have no trouble grasping, is too vague for you.
That may include some of the suggestions in this book.
If a piece of advice leaves too much unsaid for you, you may be able to
find the detailed breakdown you need in another source. However, it’s
possible the area you want clarification on is too specific and unique to you
to have been covered elsewhere. In those cases, it’s most useful to ask
someone to give you a personalized, in-depth explanation. That someone
could be a friend, family member, counselor, or support group member. If
no one like that is available, an acceptable substitute is to ask your
questions online on a social skills–related forum. A good “explainer”
doesn’t need to be incredibly socially savvy themselves, just someone who
can break down the reasoning behind everyday social rules and who will be
patient and not brush you off with a “That’s just the way things are!”
Accept that some social guidelines may never fully make sense to you
People with Asperger’s tend to be logical. They’re usually fine with
following a social rule if they can see the rationale behind it, but they may
be resistant to going along with ones that don’t make sense to them (for
example, why people say niceties like, “We should grab lunch sometime”
when they don’t mean it). If you really don’t like a social rule and are
willing to accept the consequences of not following it, that’s your choice.
For some social rules, you may have to tell yourself, “It doesn’t make sense
to me, but when this guideline is broken, it causes people’s feelings to be
upset and I’d rather avoid that.”
Learn as many of the broad principles behind socializing as you can
People with Asperger’s sometimes try to learn to socialize by attempting to
memorize rote responses to use in every situation. For example, they’ll
come up with a script to use when they run into a coworker in the break
room. As Chapter 9 explained, it isn’t practical to predict and create a
response for every eventuality. Rote replies come across as robotic and are
easily thrown off if the circumstances are different from what your template
had accounted for (what if the coworker is a new employee or the CEO?).
Taken too far, a memorization mentality can lead you to see people as
impersonal obstacles to get past through the right sequence of inputs, rather
than fellow humans to connect with.
Instead, you should try to identify and understand the underlying
principles behind each situation. That will give you more ability to adjust
and improvise as needed. For example, if you run into a coworker in the
break room, it helps to have an idea of what needs to happen in the
interaction (that is, acknowledge them and have a brief, light exchange to
show you’re friendly; possibly talk about relevant work-related topics).
Figuring out the broad goals behind each situation will take some time and
memorization, but not to the degree that memorizing word-for-word
responses to countless situations would.
Don’t rule out canned responses entirely
Rote-memorizing what to say in conversations is clunky and a less-thanoptimal
option, but some people with Asperger’s claim it has its uses. Their
reasoning is that because their instinctive understanding of socializing is
lower, they can’t always grasp the underlying principles they need to use in
some situations, at least not right away. Some of those conversations lend
themselves to premade responses, so they go with what works. For
example, they may use the same three questions whenever they start a
conversation at a party. They know they’re not being as creative or flexible
as they could be, but it helps them get through that situation.
Most people have certain conversations they get into over and over again,
like being asked about their job, and have developed a standard set of
responses. They’ll slightly vary the wording each time they go into longer
explanations, but may deliver shorter lines word for word. It isn’t inherently
a problem to have some preloaded material. You just shouldn’t over-rely on
it.
Be open to “good enough” alternatives to more confusing social rules
Some social situations have an ideal way to handle them that involves
knowing a lot of subtle, unwritten rules, as well as the right times to apply
them. If you have Asperger’s, you may find it takes too much effort to get
your head around it all. Luckily, social situations usually aren’t black-andwhite
in the sense that anything less than the best is a total failure. There
may be alternative ways to act that are a bit more crude and simplistic, but
get the job done, don’t drain your mental resources, and don’t cause too
many negative outcomes.
For example, it’s not the smoothest move to directly ask people you’re
just getting to know, “Do you want to be friends with me?” That angle will
often be viewed as too up-front and clumsy. It can put people on the spot.
It’s seen as how little kids make friends, not adults. However, under the
right circumstances, someone could use this question and have everything
go fine. A person with Asperger’s may decide, “Trying to make friends
gradually and with a light touch is too much for me to think about. I’ve
found that once I seem to be getting along with someone, asking if they
want to be friends does the job well enough. Plus, I’m a direct person who’s
not always socially perfect, so if anyone is put off by my asking, it’s a sign
they wouldn’t be a good fit for me. Maybe I’ll lose a good potential friend
here and there with this method, but I can handle that. In the future, I may
get better at being subtle, but this works for now.”
Possibly tell other people about your Asperger’s
This one has its pros and cons. Telling people about your diagnosis is
getting more feasible by the day, though, as more and more people learn
what Asperger’s syndrome is and realize it’s not a big deal. The pros are
that if other people know you have Asperger’s, they can be more
understanding and adjust their expectations accordingly. They may also be
better able to help you with your social skills. Naturally, the negative side is
that some people won’t understand, think even worse of you, or get the
wrong idea about what the condition means. Therefore, you’ll need to think
about whether you should tell someone like your boss as opposed to a
stranger at a party you’ll never see again.
T
1
THE JOURNEY
he warm California sun greeted Butch Connor as he stepped out of his truck
and onto the sands of Salmon Creek Beach. It was the first day of a long
holiday weekend, and a perfect morning to grab his board and head out for a
surf. Most of the other local surfers had the same idea that morning, and after 30
minutes or so, Butch decided to leave the crowd behind. He penetrated the
water’s surface with long, deep strokes that propelled him away from the pack
and over to a stretch of beach where he could catch a few waves away from the
crowd.
Once Butch had paddled a good 40 yards away from the other surfers, he sat
up on his board and bobbed up and down in the rolling swells while he waited
for a wave that caught his fancy. A beautiful teal wave began to crest as it
approached the shoreline, and as Butch lay down on his board to catch the wave,
a loud splash behind him stole his attention. Butch glanced over his right
shoulder and froze in horror at the sight of a 14-inch, gray dorsal fin cutting
through the water toward him. Butch’s muscles locked up, and he lay there in a
panic, gasping for air. He became hyper-focused on his surroundings; he could
hear his heart pounding as he watched the sun glistening on the fin’s moist
surface.
The approaching wave stood tall to reveal Butch’s worst nightmare in the
shimmering, translucent surface—a massive great white shark that stretched 14
feet from nose to tail. Paralyzed by the fear coursing through his veins, Butch let
the wave roll past, and with it a speedy ride to the safety of the shoreline. It was
just the shark and him now; it swam in a semi-circle and approached him headon.
The shark drifted in slowly along his left side, and he was too transfixed by
the proximity of the massive fish to notice his left leg dangling perilously off his
surfboard in the frigid saltwater. It’s as big around as my Volkswagen, Butch
thought as the dorsal fin approached. He felt the sudden urge to reach out and
touch the shark. It’s going to kill me anyway. Why shouldn’t I touch it?
The approaching wave stood tall to reveal Butch’s worst nightmare in the
shimmering, translucent surface—a massive great white shark that
stretched 14 feet from nose to tail.
The shark didn’t give him a chance. The shark, with a massive chomp of its
jaws, thrust its head upward from underneath Butch’s leg. Butch’s leg stayed on
top of the shark’s rising, boulder-sized head and out of its cavernous mouth, and
he fell off the opposite side of his surfboard into the murky water. Butch
splashing into the water sent the shark into a spastic frenzy. The shark waved its
head about maniacally while snapping its jaws open and shut. The great white
struck nothing; it blasted water in all directions as it thrashed about. The irony of
floating alongside a 3,000-pound killing machine without so much as a scratch
was not lost on Butch. Neither was the grave reality that this apex predator was
unlikely to miss again. Thoughts of escape and survival flooded Butch’s mind as
quickly and completely as terror had in the moments prior.
The shark stopped snapping and swam around Butch in tight circles. Instead
of climbing back on his surfboard, Butch floated on his belly with his arms
draped over the board. He rotated the surfboard as the shark circled, using the
surfboard as a makeshift barrier between himself and the man-eater. Butch’s fear
morphed into anger as he waited for the beast to strike. The shark came at him
again, and Butch decided it was time to put up a fight. He aimed the sharp,
pointed nose of his surfboard at the shark as it approached. When it raised its
head out of the water to bite, Butch jammed the nose of the board into the
shark’s slotted gills. This blow sent the shark into another bout of nervous
thrashing. Butch climbed atop his board and yelled, “Shark!” at the pack of
surfers down the beach. Butch’s warning and the sight of the turbulent cauldron
of whitewater around him sent the surfers racing for dry land.
Butch also paddled toward safety, but the shark stopped him dead in his
tracks after just a few strokes. It surfaced in his path to the shoreline, and then
began circling him once more. Butch came to the dire conclusion that his evasive
tactics were merely delaying the inevitable, and a paralyzing fear took hold of
him yet again. Butch lay there trembling on his surfboard while the shark
circled. He mustered the will to keep the tip of his board pointed in the shark’s
direction, but he was too terror-stricken to get back in the water and use his
board as a barrier.
Butch’s thoughts raced between terror and sadness. He wondered what his
three children were going to do without him and how long his girlfriend would
take to move on with her life. He wanted to live. He wanted to escape this
monster, and he needed to calm down if that was ever going to happen. Butch
convinced himself that the shark could sense his fear like a rabid dog; he decided
that he must get hold of himself because it was his fear that was motivating the
shark to strike. To Butch’s surprise, his body listened. The trembling subsided,
and the blood returned to his arms and legs. He felt strong. He was ready to
paddle. And paddle Butch did—straight for the shoreline. A healthy rip current
ensured that his journey to shore was a nerve-rattling five minutes of paddling
like mad with the sense that the shark was somewhere behind him and could
strike at any moment. When Butch made it to the beach, an awestruck group of
surfers and other beachgoers were waiting for him. The surfers thanked him
profusely for the warning and patted him on the back. For Butch Connor,
standing on dry land had never felt so good.
WHEN REASON AND FEELING COLLIDE
Butch and the great white weren’t fighting the only battle in the water that
morning. Deep inside Butch’s brain, his reason struggled for control of his
behavior against an onslaught of intense emotions. The bulk of the time, his
feelings won out, which was mostly to his detriment (paralyzing fear) but at
times a benefit (the anger-fueled jab of his surfboard). With great effort, Butch
was able to calm himself down, and—realizing the shark wasn’t going away—
make the risky paddle for shore that saved his life. Though most of us will never
have to tussle with a great white shark, our brains battle it out like Butch’s every
single day.
The daily challenge of dealing effectively with emotions is critical to the
human condition because our brains are hard-wired to give emotions the upper
hand. Here’s how it works: everything you see, smell, hear, taste and touch
travels through your body in the form of electric signals. These signals pass from
cell to cell until they reach their ultimate destination, your brain. They enter your
brain at the base near the spinal cord, but must travel to your frontal lobe (behind
your forehead) before reaching the place where rational, logical thinking takes
place. The trouble is, they pass through your limbic system along the way—the
place where emotions are produced. This journey ensures you experience things
emotionally before your reason can kick into gear.
The rational area of your brain (the front of your brain) can’t stop the
emotion “felt” by your limbic system, but the two areas do influence each other
and maintain constant communication. The communication between your
emotional and rational “brains” is the physical source of emotional intelligence.
The physical pathway for emotional intelligence starts in the brain, at the spinal
cord. Your primary senses enter here and must travel to the front of your brain
before you can think rationally about your experience. But first they travel
through the limbic system, the place where emotions are experienced. Emotional
intelligence requires effective communication between the rational and
emotional centers of the brain.
When emotional intelligence was first discovered, it served as the missing
link in a peculiar finding: people with the highest levels of intelligence (IQ)
outperform those with average IQs just 20 percent of the time, while people with
average IQs outperform those with high IQs 70 percent of the time. This
anomaly threw a massive wrench into what many people had always assumed
was the source of success—IQ. Scientists realized there must be another variable
that explained success above and beyond one’s IQ, and years of research and
countless studies pointed to emotional intelligence (EQ) as the critical factor.
A Time magazine cover and hours of television coverage introduced millions
to EQ, and once people were exposed to it, they wanted to know more. They
wanted to know how EQ worked and who had it. Most importantly, people
wanted to know if they had it. Books emerged to scratch this itch, including our
own, The Emotional Intelligence Quick Book. Released in 2004, the Quick Book
was unique because each copy contained a passcode that let the reader go online
and take the world’s most popular EQ test, the Emotional Intelligence
Appraisal®. The book satisfied readers’ curiosity by teaching the ins and outs of
EQ and (thanks to the test) providing a new self-perspective that wasn’t
available anywhere else.
people with the highest levels of intelligence (IQ) outperform those with
average IQs just 20% of the time, while people with average IQs
outperform those with high IQs 70% of the time.
The Emotional Intelligence Quick Book hit home—it was an instant best
seller that has been translated into 23 languages and is now available in more
than 150 countries. But times have changed. The emotional intelligence field is
on the steep incline of a new wave of understanding—how people can improve
their EQ and make lasting gains that have a profoundly positive impact upon
their lives. Just as knowing your EQ score was reserved for the privileged few
before the publication of The Emotional Intelligence Quick Book, learning how
to increase your EQ is something that happens only in isolated circles. Our
company trains hundreds of people each week to increase their EQ, but even at
this pace it would take 3,840 years to hit every adult currently residing in the
U.S.! We realize that we’ve unwittingly been holding important information
back. We believe everyone should have the opportunity to increase his or her
EQ, and have created this book to make it possible.
YOUR JOURNEY
Emotional Intelligence 2.0 has one purpose—increasing your EQ. These pages
will take you far beyond knowing what EQ is and how you score. You’ll
discover time-tested strategies that you can begin using today to take your EQ to
new heights. As you transform yourself and bring new skills into your life,
you’ll reap all of the benefits that this incredible human ability has to offer.
The 66 strategies in this book are the result of many years of careful testing
with people just like you. These strategies provide the specifics of what you need
to say, do, and think to increase your EQ. To glean everything they have to offer,
you need to know where to focus your attention. The first major step in your
journey to a higher EQ is to go online and take the new edition of the Emotional
Intelligence Appraisal® test. Taking the test now provides a baseline against
which you can gauge your improvement as you read on and learn. Measuring
your EQ takes your learning beyond a conceptual or motivational exercise—
your score profile uncovers the EQ skills you need to improve the most, and it
pinpoints the individual strategies from this book that will get you there. This
feature is new to 2.0, and it takes the guesswork out of choosing the strategies
that will increase your EQ the most.
The value of measuring your EQ now is akin to learning the waltz with an
actual partner. If I tell you how the dance works, you are likely to learn
something and may even get the urge to try it yourself. If, as I show you how to
do a waltz, you practice each step with a partner, your chances of remembering
them later on the dance floor go up exponentially. The EQ profile you receive
from taking the Emotional Intelligence Appraisal® is your dance partner in
developing these skills. It will remind you where to step with every beat of the
music.
Your online report includes a goal-tracking system that summarizes the skills
you are working on and provides automatic reminders to help you stay focused.
E-learning activities bring EQ to life via clips from Hollywood movies,
television and real-world events. You will also learn how your scores compare to
other people’s.
In addition to receiving the most accurate scores possible, taking the
Emotional Intelligence Appraisal® now lets you see how much your EQ scores
increase with time. You can take the test twice—once now and again after
you’ve had enough time to practice and adopt the strategies from this book.
After you complete the test a second time, your updated feedback report will
display your scores side by side and offer insights into how you’ve changed and
what your next steps should be to keep your EQ working for you. The orange
insert at the back of this book contains instructions for going online to access the
Emotional Intelligence Appraisal®, as well as the unique passcode that you’ll
need to access the test.
Emotions can help you and they can hurt you, but you have no say in the
matter until you understand them. We invite you to begin your journey now,
because we know that emotional mastery and understanding can become realities
for you.
B
2
THE BIG PICTURE
efore you take a closer look at each of the four EQ skills in the next chapter,
there are some important things you need to know about EQ as a whole.
Over the last decade we’ve tested more than 500,000 people to explore the role
emotions play in daily living. We’ve learned how people see themselves versus
what others see, and we’ve observed how various choices affect personal and
professional success.
Despite the growing focus on EQ, a global deficit in understanding and
managing emotions remains. Only 36 percent of the people we tested are able to
accurately identify their emotions as they happen. This means that two thirds of
us are typically controlled by our emotions and are not yet skilled at spotting
them and using them to our benefit. Emotional awareness and understanding are
not taught in school. We enter the workforce knowing how to read, write, and
report on bodies of knowledge, but too often, we lack the skills to manage our
emotions in the heat of the challenging problems that we face. Good decisions
require far more than factual knowledge. They are made using self-knowledge
and emotional mastery when they’re needed most.
Considering the range of emotions people express, it’s no wonder they can
get the better of us. We have so many words to describe the feelings that surface
in life, yet all emotions are derivations of five core feelings: happiness, sadness,
anger, fear, and shame. As you move through your daily routine—whether
you’re working, spending time with family or friends, eating, exercising,
relaxing, or even sleeping—you are subject to a constant stream of emotions. It
is so easy to forget that we have emotional reactions to almost everything that
happens in our lives, whether we notice them or not. The complexity of these
emotions is revealed in their varying forms of intensity.
Only 36 percent of the people we tested are able to accurately identify
their emotions as they happen.
ADAPTED FROM AND REPRODUCED BY PERMISSION FROM JULIA
WEST
Triggers and Emotional Hijackings
While Butch Connor was being attacked by a great white shark, he experienced
several emotional hijackings—moments when his emotions controlled his
behavior and he reacted without thinking. Typically, the more intense your
emotions are, the greater the likelihood that they will dictate your actions.
Matters of life or death—such as being attacked by a massive beast—are certain
to induce a temporary emotional hijacking.
In Butch’s case, emotional hijackings left him paralyzed by fear, but even in
the presence of a man-eater, Butch was able to use his thoughts to take back
control from his emotions. Butch reasoned with himself until the paralysis
subsided and he was calm enough to complete the paddle to shore. Butch’s
thoughts didn’t make his feelings of fear and terror disappear, but they did keep
his emotions from hijacking his behavior.
Since our brains are wired to make us emotional creatures, your first reaction
to an event is always going to be an emotional one. You have no control over
this part of the process. You do control the thoughts that follow an emotion, and
you have a great deal of say in how you react to an emotion—as long as you are
aware of it. Some experiences produce emotions that you are easily aware of;
other times, emotions may seem nonexistent. When something generates a
prolonged emotional reaction in you, it’s called a “trigger event.” Your reaction
to your triggers is shaped by your personal history, which includes your
experience with similar situations. As your EQ skills grow, you’ll learn to spot
your triggers and practice productive ways of responding that will become
habitual.
Sizing Up the Whole Person
Emotional intelligence is your ability to recognize and understand emotions in
yourself and others, and your ability to use this awareness to manage your
behavior and relationships. Emotional intelligence is the “something” in each of
us that is a bit intangible. It affects how we manage behavior, navigate social
complexities, and make personal decisions that achieve positive results.
Emotional intelligence taps into a fundamental element of human behavior
that is distinct from your intellect. There is no known connection between IQ
and EQ; you simply can’t predict EQ based on how smart someone is. Cognitive
intelligence, or IQ, is not flexible. Your IQ, short of a traumatic event such as a
brain injury, is fixed from birth. You don’t get smarter by learning new facts or
information. Intelligence is your ability to learn, and it’s the same at age 15 as it
is at age 50. EQ, on the other hand, is a flexible skill that can be learned. While it
is true that some people are naturally more emotionally intelligent than others, a
high EQ can be developed even if you aren’t born with it.
Personality is the final piece in the puzzle. It’s the stable “style” that defines
each of us. Your personality is a result of your preferences, such as your
inclination to introversion or extroversion. However, like IQ, personality can’t
be used to predict emotional intelligence. Also like IQ, personality is stable over
a lifetime. Personality traits appear early in life, and they don’t go away. People
often assume that certain traits (for example, extroversion) are associated with a
higher EQ, but those who prefer to be with other people are no more emotionally
intelligent than people who prefer to be alone. You can use your personality to
assist in developing your EQ, but the latter isn’t dependent on the former. EQ is
a flexible skill, while personality does not change. IQ, EQ, and personality
assessed together are the best way to get a picture of the whole person. When
you measure all three in a single individual, they don’t overlap much. Instead,
each covers unique ground that helps to explain what makes a person tick.
IQ, personality, and EQ are distinct qualities we all possess. Together, they
determine how we think and act. It is impossible to predict one based upon
another. People may be intelligent but not emotionally intelligent, and people of
all types of personalities can be high in EQ and/or IQ. Of the three, EQ is the
only quality that is flexible and able to change.
The Impact of EQ
How much of an impact does EQ have on your professional success? The short
answer is: a lot! It’s a powerful way to focus your energy in one direction with a
tremendous result. We’ve tested EQ alongside 33 other important skills and
found that it subsumes the majority of them, including time management,
decision-making, and communication. Your EQ is the foundation for a host of
critical skills—it impacts most everything you say and do each day. EQ is so
critical to success that it accounts for 58 percent of performance in all types of
jobs. It’s the single biggest predictor of performance in the workplace and the
strongest driver of leadership and personal excellence.
EQ is the foundation for a host of critical skills. A little effort spent on increasing
your EQ tends to have a wide-ranging, positive impact on your life.
EQ is so critical to success that it accounts for 58 percent of performance
in all types of jobs.
No matter whether people measure high or low in EQ, they can work to
improve it, and those who score low can actually catch up to their co workers.
Research conducted at the business school at the University of Queensland in
Australia discovered that people who are low in EQ and job performance can
match their colleagues who excel in both—solely by working to improve their
EQ.
Of all the people we’ve studied at work, we have found that 90 percent of
high performers are also high in EQ. On the flip side, just 20 percent of low
performers are high in EQ. You can be a high performer without EQ, but the
chances are slim. People who develop their EQ tend to be successful on the job
because the two go hand in hand. Naturally, people with high EQs make more
money—an average of $29,000 more per year than people with low EQs. The
link between EQ and earnings is so direct that every point increase in EQ adds
$1,300 to an annual salary. These findings hold true for people in all industries,
at all levels, in every region of the world. We haven’t yet been able to find a job
in which performance and pay aren’t tied closely to EQ.
The link between EQ and earnings is so direct that every point increase
in EQ adds $1,300 to an annual salary.
In order to be successful and fulfilled nowadays, you must learn to maximize
your EQ skills, for those who employ a unique blend of reason and feeling
achieve the greatest results. The remainder of this book will show you how to
make this happen.
T
3
WHAT EMOTIONAL
INTELLIGENCE LOOKS LIKE:
UNDERSTANDING
THE FOUR SKILLS
o truly improve your ability in the four emotional intelligence skills, you
need to better understand each skill and what it looks like in action. The four
emotional intelligence skills pair up under two primary competencies: personal
competence and social competence. Personal competence is made up of your
self-awareness and self-management skills, which focus more on you
individually than on your interactions with other people. Personal competence is
your ability to stay aware of your emotions and manage your behavior and
tendencies. Social competence is made up of your social awareness and
relationship management skills; social competence is your ability to understand
other people’s moods, behavior and motives in order to improve the quality of
your relationships.
To truly improve your ability in the four emotional intelligence skills, you
need to better understand each skill and what it looks like in action.
The four skills that together make up emotional intelligence. The top two skills,
self-awareness and self-management, are more about you. The bottom two skills,
social awareness and relationship management, are more about how you are with
other people.
Self-Awareness
Self-awareness is your ability to accurately perceive your own emotions in the
moment and understand your tendencies across situations. Self-awareness
includes staying on top of your typical reactions to specific events, challenges,
and people. A keen understanding of your tendencies is important; it helps you
quickly make sense of your emotions. A high degree of self-awareness requires a
willingness to tolerate the discomfort of focusing on feelings that may be
negative.
The only way to genuinely understand your emotions is to spend enough
time thinking through them to figure out where they come from and why they
are there. Emotions always serve a purpose. Because they are your reactions to
the world around you, emotions always come from somewhere. Many times
emotions seem to arise out of thin air, and it’s important to understand why
something gets a reaction out of you. People who do this can cut to the core of a
feeling quickly. Situations that create strong emotions will always require more
thought, and these prolonged periods of self-reflection often keep you from
doing something that you’ll regret.
Self-awareness is not about discovering deep, dark secrets or unconscious
motivations, but, rather, it comes from developing a straightforward and honest
understanding of what makes you tick. People high in self-awareness are
remarkably clear in their understanding of what they do well, what motivates
and satisfies them, and which people and situations push their buttons.
The surprising thing about self-awareness is that just thinking about it helps
you improve the skill, even though much of your focus initially tends to be on
what you do “wrong.” Having self-awareness means you aren’t afraid of your
emotional “mistakes.” They tell you what you should be doing differently and
provide the steady stream of information you need to understand as your life
unfolds.
Self-awareness is a foundational skill; when you have it, self-awareness
makes the other emotional intelligence skills much easier to use. As selfawareness
increases, people’s satisfaction with life—defined as their ability to
reach their goals at work and at home—skyrockets. Self-awareness is so
important for job performance that 83 percent of people high in self-awareness
are top performers, and just 2 percent of bottom performers are high in selfawareness.
Why is this so? When you are self-aware you are far more likely to
pursue the right opportunities, put your strengths to work and—perhaps most
importantly—keep your emotions from holding you back.
The need for self-awareness has never been greater. Guided by the mistaken
notion that psychology deals exclusively with pathology, we assume that the
only time to learn about ourselves is in the face of crisis. We tend to embrace
those things with which we’re comfortable, and put the blinders on the moment
something makes us uncomfortable. But it’s really the whole picture that serves
us. The more we understand the beauty and the blemishes, the better we are able
to achieve our full potential.
What Self-Awareness Looks Like
Dave T., regional service manager
Self-awareness score = 95*
What people who work with him say:
“Dave has clear long-term goals, and he doesn’t make sacrifices for short-term
gains. Dave is an ‘up-front’ kind of guy who doesn’t play ‘mind games’ with
people. I have witnessed this at company meetings and in meetings with
customers.”
“The best example I can provide for Dave is his move to our company. I’m sure
there was an intense desire to make changes within the local team right out of
the gate, but Dave took extra care to diagnose the situation, the team, and the
customer prior to offering suggestions or mandates for change.”
“In short, Dave manages his emotions; they don’t manage him. I’ve seen him
accept difficult business news with a brief frown, and then he quickly moves
beyond that and partners with his team to find solutions to improve the
situation.”
*Scores are on the 1-to 100-point scale from the Emotional Intelligence
Appraisal®. Scores and coworker comments are from actual people, though
names and other identifying information have been altered.
Maria M., human resources manager
Self-awareness score = 90
What people who work with her say:
“In every situation that I have been involved with, good or bad, Maria has
always remained calm, cool, and collected—even at times when I know she must
have felt frustrated or angry. Maria is really honest about what she is feeling
without getting bent out of shape about it. When faced with a difficult situation,
she knows how to be firm and still kind at the same time.”
“She is open and authentic at all times, and it is so meaningful to everyone that
she interacts with. I would suggest that Maria not change: however, she can get a
bit tougher sooner in some cases. She is aware of this and watches to ensure that
she does not let kindness get in the way.”
“During challenging situations with employees, Maria is very aware of her tone
and makes an effort to keep the conversation appropriate. People here trust her.”
What a Lack of Self-Awareness Looks Like
Tina J., marketing manager
Self-awareness score = 69
What people who work with her say:
“On occasion, Tina’s stress and sense of urgency are projected/pushed on to
other people. It would be good for her to better understand how her behavior
affects others’ work and emotional stress. Also, she sometimes comes across as
defensive or aggressive, so for her to be more aware of her tone and language
would be helpful.”
“When things are going well for Tina, her emotional intelligence skills are
stronger. She needs to learn to read herself and recognize her triggers so that she
can respond more effectively when triggered.”
“She needs to become aware of how she is perceived. She can come across as
being very demanding, but I don’t believe she means to.”
Giles B., operations director
Self-awareness score = 67
What people who work with him say:
“Giles is very much in his ‘own little world.’ He obviously does care about his
coworkers, but he doesn’t seem to know where to draw a line. His personality
can be overwhelming, but he doesn’t notice when the other person is feeling
annoyed, frustrated, or overwhelmed by him.”
“When working with customers, he is very good at talking about the products
and services we offer. On group projects, sometimes he gets so focused on the
outcome, the process is missed. If he were to take a moment and let all the
emotions settle, then take a look at the options to reach the desired outcome,
things would go more smoothly.”
“Giles is passionate about what he does. Sometimes that passion gets in the way.
He might not notice that I am busy with something else before he jumps in and
starts talking to me. When he is excited, he talks over you, and it is hard to get a
word in edgewise. He doesn’t mean to; he just is excited about what he does.”
Self-Management
Self-management is what happens when you act—or do not act. It is dependent
on your self-awareness and is the second major part of personal competence.
Self-management is your ability to use your awareness of your emotions to stay
flexible and direct your behavior positively. This means managing your
emotional reactions to situations and people. Some emotions create a paralyzing
fear that makes your thinking so cloudy that the best course of action is nowhere
to be found—assuming that there is something you should be doing. In these
cases, self-management is revealed by your ability to tolerate the uncertainty as
you explore your emotions and options. Once you understand and build comfort
with what you are feeling, the best course of action will show itself.
Self-management is more than resisting explosive or problematic behavior.
The biggest challenge that people face is managing their tendencies over time
and applying their skills in a variety of situations. Obvious and momentary
opportunities for self-control (i.e., “I’m so mad at that darn dog!”) are the easiest
to spot and manage. Real results come from putting your momentary needs on
hold to pursue larger, more important goals. The realization of such goals is
often delayed, meaning that your commitment to self-management will be tested
over and over again. Those who manage themselves the best are able to see
things through without cracking. Success comes to those who can put their needs
on hold and continually manage their tendencies.
Real results come from putting your momentary needs on hold to pursue
larger, more important goals.
What Self-Management Looks Like
Lane L., healthcare administrator
Self-management score = 93
What people who work with her say:
“Lane is the epitome of patience and understanding during heated, emotionallycharged
meetings. Others around her become fully embroiled in the discussions,
and Lane actively listens and responds with knowledge and wisdom.”
“I have seen first-hand how well she deals with difficult situations (i.e.,
termination of an employee). Lane is sensitive, yet direct and to the point. She
listens patiently and sets a high standard of conduct.”
“Lane is great one-on-one. She communicates well and thinks on her feet. Her
reaction to crisis is excellent. Her ability to separate emotion from logic makes
her a good tactical manager. I wish there were many more of her.”
Yeshe M., computer programmer
Self-management score = 91
What people who work with him say:
“Yeshe handles stressful and confrontational situations very well. No matter how
harshly project managers (PMs) hammer Yeshe, he never loses his cool! This
gives him a lot of credibility with the PMs. He’s also able to work with other
people whose working style he isn’t a fan of. I know going back and forth with
them can be frustrating sometimes, but Yeshe never loses his patience.”
“I’ve seen Yeshe in an extremely frustrating situation where he couldn’t get
something done because other people didn’t do their jobs. He dealt with it
politely and professionally. He was able to explain the procedure again in order
to achieve the best possible solution, even though he was upset.”
“I have never heard Yeshe speak negatively about someone who has a different
opinion or idea. A lot of talking behind people’s backs happens around here, and
he doesn’t give into the temptation, even when he feels strongly about an issue.”
What a Lack of Self-Management Looks Like
Jason L., information technology consultant
Self-management score = 59
What people who work with him say:
“In stressful situations, or when something goes wrong, Jason sometimes
responds too quickly, sharply, or disjointedly. I wish Jason would take some time
to cool off and slow down before responding. He’s so emotional. I have seen his
coworkers respond in disbelief to the manner in which he communicated with
them. Jason means well but can panic when he is stressed. His reactions trickle
onto his teammates.”
“Jason should be more aware of his verbal outbursts, and how they affect both
clients and coworkers. He is not mean-spirited; he cares a great deal about others
but these verbal miscues are just that—outbursts that need to be thought out
before expressed. These happen more when he is stressed . . . as the old
commercial says, he shouldn’t let them see him sweat so much.”
“Jason lets his emotions rule his behavior. Sometimes he acts or speaks
hurriedly. I wish he would be a bit more patient and give the situation an
opportunity to work itself out before reacting. Many times these situations
resolve themselves or aren’t quite as urgent as he perceives, but before you know
it, he’s heightened the intensity with a flurry of messages.”
Mei S., regional sales director
Self-management score = 61
What people who work with her say:
“Mei needs to not be so honest. Her staff don’t need to know about all of the bull
that goes down at corporate. If certain things upset her, she needs to learn to
keep them to herself. When she is unhappy, it sets the tone for our team. Mei
tends to radiate stress in certain situations, and as a leader, it impacts her team
negatively by creating stress and negativity rather than diffusing them.”
“Mei has a hard time congratulating staff for their accomplishments, and it
comes across as jealousy. It feels like I am in competition with her rather than
feeling like she wants me to succeed. I think Mei is a great sales professional,
and she treats clients well. I wish she would give her employees the same
treatment.”
“Mei needs to be proactive instead of reactive. In times of crisis, she shouldn’t
reveal to everyone how stressed she is. She’s so focused and driven to personally
succeed that perhaps she takes on too much herself. She has a demanding
workload managing the West Coast Team, but she needs to hold her emotions
back when people vent about their own problems in meetings.”
Social Awareness
As the first component of social competence, social awareness is a foundational
skill. Social awareness is your ability to accurately pick up on emotions in other
people and understand what is really going on with them. This often means
perceiving what other people are thinking and feeling even if you do not feel the
same way. It’s easy to get caught up in your own emotions and forget to consider
the perspective of the other party. Social awareness ensures you stay focused and
absorb critical information.
Listening and observing are the most important elements of social
awareness. To listen well and observe what’s going on around us, we have to
stop doing many things we like to do. We have to stop talking, stop the
monologue that may be running through our minds, stop anticipating the point
the other person is about to make, and stop thinking ahead to what we are going
to say next. It takes practice to really watch people as you interact with them and
get a good sense of what they are thinking and feeling. At times, you’ll feel like
an anthropologist. Anthropologists make their living watching others in their
natural state without letting their own thoughts and feelings disturb the
observation. This is social awareness in its purest form. The difference is you
won’t be 100 yards away watching events unfold through a pair of binoculars.
To be socially aware, you have to spot and understand people’s emotions while
you’re right there in the middle of it—a contributing, yet astutely aware, member
of the interaction.
What Social Awareness Looks Like
Alfonso J., pharmaceutical sales manager
Social awareness score = 96
What people who work with him say:
“Alfonso has a rare talent to be able to read the emotions of others very well. He
adjusts to different situations and manages to build relationships with almost
anyone. Good examples are dinners, meetings, and ride-alongs with reps.”
“Alfonso does an excellent job relating to the frustrations reps have with other
departments within our company. He is always looking out for his reps, and has
the ability to put himself in the reps’ shoes, and ask himself what is wrong with
the situation. People become very loyal to Alfonso.”
“Alfonso recognizes emotions very effectively when it comes to the end-ofmonth
numbers and end-of-year numbers with his reps, getting the most out of
his team. He was great at building relationships with the surgeons at the dinner
table because he could read how to lead the conversation without them feeling
like they were being controlled.”
Maya S., organizational development executive
Social awareness score = 92
What people who work with her say:
“Maya has an uncanny ability to spot and address the elephant in the room. She
does a good job acknowledging other people’s feelings when communicating
difficult news. She reflects how others are feeling, and adapts her
communication style to help reach a resolution. She gets to know people on a
personal level so she can better understand their perspectives and work well with
them.”
“Maya is great in executive team meetings where she respectfully listens to her
peers and then offers her opinion. She has a sincere interest in understanding
people and offers them valuable insights based on what they’re saying or doing.
She is a good team-builder who strengthens bonds within the team.”
“Maya is the most effective ‘active listener’ I have ever seen. She is skilled at
communicating the ‘context’ for her comments with the goal of ensuring
understanding. She is respectful toward others while being able to establish her
authority. Maya motivates and inspires people. She can uplift people and put
them at ease.”
What a Lack of Social Awareness Looks Like
Craig C., attorney
Social awareness score = 55
What people who work with him say:
“Craig needs to allow others to feel good about their ideas, even when he has a
better plan. He also needs to be more patient, and allow them to have equally
effective plans that are just different from his plan. I would like him to seek to
understand what people are feeling and thinking and notice what evidence there
is regarding situations before speaking his opinion or offering solutions.”
“Craig needs to listen better. He needs to pay attention to what is being said
rather than thinking about what he wants to say. It is usually apparent in his body
language that he is not listening, which puts people off. I also wish that he would
be more accurate when representing other people’s ideas.”
“Craig is not one to socialize. He is so focused on work and sometimes comes
across as not interested in what’s going on with a person on that particular day.
When he has new ideas (or ideas from his former firm), he has a hard time
explaining them so the staff will accept them. Craig should learn to listen to
others with his ears and with his heart. He seems to have a ‘hardening of his
positions,’ and it makes him unwilling to accept other people’s viewpoints or
include their input in his decisions.”
Rachel M., project manager
Social awareness score = 62
What people who work with her say:
“Rachel misses the non-technical currents in meetings. The mood and evolution
of opinions are lost on her. Rachel needs to learn to absorb the non-technical,
human side of meetings and become a student of people and their feelings.”
“Rachel gets singularly focused on a particular issue and does not see the forest
for the trees. This can get frustrating for those of us around her. She is typically
oblivious to our reactions. She should check with everyone around the table to
calibrate where their head is at before getting too enmeshed in the details of her
project. She would be better served by framing the topic in large chunks rather
than taking everyone through the details straight away.”
“Rachel can sometimes get so caught up in her own thoughts during meetings
and one-on-one conversations that she is not really listening to either the explicit
or implicit dialogue going on. This makes her less effective because she is not
actively participating in the ongoing conversation and misses opportunities to
influence the direction. Rachel needs to work on considering issues from the
other person’s agenda or point of view so that she can more effectively
influence, or at least directly address, their perspective. It will also help her to
work on making her conversations as concise and targeted as possible. People
can lose interest or get confused during long explanations, or when they are
unclear about the message.”
Relationship Management
Though relationship management is the second component of social competence,
this skill often taps into your abilities in the first three emotional intelligence
skills: self-awareness, self-management, and social awareness. Relationship
management is your ability to use your awareness of your own emotions and
those of others to manage interactions successfully. This ensures clear
communication and effective handling of conflict. Relationship management is
also the bond you build with others over time. People who manage relationships
well are able to see the benefit of connecting with many different people, even
those they are not fond of. Solid relationships are something that should be
sought and cherished. They are the result of how you understand people, how
you treat them, and the history you share.
The weaker the connection you have with someone, the harder it is to get
your point across. If you want people to listen, you have to practice relationship
management and seek benefits from every relationship, especially the
challenging ones. The difference between an interaction and a relationship is a
matter of frequency. It’s a product of the quality, depth, and time you spend
interacting with another person.
Relationship management poses the greatest challenge for most people
during times of stress. When you consider that more than 70 percent of the
people we’ve tested have difficulty handling stress, it’s easy to see why building
quality relationships poses a challenge. Some of the most challenging and
stressful situations people face are at work. Conflicts at work tend to fester when
people passively avoid problems, because people lack the skills needed to
initiate a direct, yet constructive conversation. Conflicts at work tend to explode
when people don’t manage their anger or frustration, and choose to take it out on
other people. Relationship management gives you the skills you need to avoid
both scenarios, and make the most out of every interaction you have with
another person.
What Relationship Management Looks Like
Gail C., chief financial officer
Relationship management score = 95
What people who work with her say:
“Gail has an innate ability to read people and their emotions, and she uses what
she learns to create a safe and inviting forum for discussion. There has never
been a time that Gail’s door was not ‘open’ when I have needed her, and she
always manages to maintain a pleasant and professional manner even when her
workload is demanding. People know that they can count on Gail and what they
say to her in confidence will be respected and not repeated.”
“Gail is very sensitive to others and tries to make situations better. When
someone is upset, she asks just enough questions to get a handle on the situation,
and then is able to give concrete advice and help to the person, making them feel
100% better. Gail makes you feel smart and confident when she delivers
feedback, even if you’ve made a mistake. She helps her staff improve and grow,
and she sets a good example for dealing with people assertively and speaking
up.”
“Even during tough conversations, Gail is concerned about maintaining good,
comfortable relationships with all parties involved. Gail finds out something
about the other person’s interests and inquires about it when meeting, even if it
appears there is no common ground. Gail has a firm handle on her own emotions
and almost seems to feel what you feel when she is talking with you, which
helps you feel like she relates to you and understands you.”
Allister B., physician
Relationship management score = 93
What people who work with him say:
“Allister is a wonderfully patient, empathetic listener, which is why his patients
love him. He tries very hard to be nonjudgmental and gives people the benefit of
the doubt. He is the same way with the nurses and technicians. I’ve seen Allister
in situations where his patients’ families were asking difficult questions, and he
was able to remain calm and answer without alienating the family member
asking the questions. He listens carefully to what others say and never shows if
he is upset or bothered by it. He responds kindly but with authority.”
“Allister’s interaction skills are supreme. In situations that I’ve witnessed him
less than pleased with a specific outcome, he has always expressed his position
with thoughtful insight about his expectations without anger or outburst. I’d
describe him as direct, yet free from confrontation or sounding out of control. He
is also quick to praise the staff’s efforts and success when deserving. He is good
at seeing the overall picture and then counseling in a compassionate and realistic
manner.”
“I have never left Allister feeling anything less than 110%. He knows when to
approach an issue sensitively, and knows when to give praise and
encouragement. Allister knows his colleagues very well, and this enables him to
handle conflict in a calm and positive manner. He’s respected for collecting
feedback before drawing conclusions. He tries to find the best way to
communicate with others, even when there’s an atmosphere of resistance,
confusion, or outright conflict. His ability to empathize with others is
outstanding, and it creates positive, strong relationships.”
What a Lack of Relationship Management Looks Like
Dave M., sales manager
Relationship management score = 66
What people who work with him say:
“If Dave doesn’t see eye-to-eye with someone, he makes it apparent that it’s not
worth developing the relationship. I wish that he would still dedicate the time
and resources necessary to make a win for the territory. When he feels that a
certain person he is working with may not be an ‘ally’ but someone not to be
trusted, he will be very clear about his opinion about that person. This has a
ripple effect on the people he tells, and it erodes camaraderie. Dave is usually
effective when he gets to know people better, and trusts that they are not a threat,
but he’ll have to get over this if he wants to keep climbing the ladder.”
“Dave can get over-excited when meeting new people and this can be a good
trait, but some people don’t respond to his enthusiasm, and they pull back from
him. It makes it hard for them to connect with him. I would like to see Dave
work on unifying his team, and dispel the feeling that some decisions are made
based on his personal opinion or bias. Too often, people feel as if they’ve had
their professional opinion ignored in spite of providing a solid foundation for
that opinion.”
“Dave always reacts to people rather than responding to them. To have a strong
opinion is fine, but to dismiss others’ thoughts is not. He also needs to tailor his
communication style to the person. His approach is nearly always very direct,
which can be difficult for some people to handle.”
Natalie T., floor supervisor
Relationship management score = 69
What people who work with her say:
“Natalie often minimizes a person’s point of view or experience. She justifies
bad situations by stating that it could always be worse, you just don’t understand,
or you should just get over it. She comes across as blunt and not empathetic,
particularly with her subordinates. I want her to be more genuine in her
interactions with them, and show a general appreciation for others.”
“Natalie needs to stop finding faults in every situation. It is tiring and demotivating.
She needs to start recognizing people’s achievements. There is a
stigma that exists that Natalie is tough, difficult to work for, and unapproachable.
She may achieve results, but at the expense of others.”
“I would like to see Natalie avoid making judgmental or negative statements to
her team, or others, when her statements add no value. Helping people see what
could be done different helps them develop, but her continued negative feedback
comes across as her feeling the need to belittle people. People no longer value
her input, and at times view it as her need to be seen as superior.”
S
5
SELF-AWARENESS STRATEGIES
imply put, to be self-aware is to know yourself as you really are. Initially,
self-awareness can come across as a somewhat ambiguous concept. There is
no finish line where someone is going to slap a medal on you and deem you
“self-aware.” Awareness of yourself is not just knowing that you are a morning
person instead of a night owl. It’s deeper than that. Getting to know yourself
inside and out is a continuous journey of peeling back the layers of the onion and
becoming more and more comfortable with what is in the middle—the true
essence of you.
Your hard-wired emotional reactions to anything come before you even have
a chance to respond. Since it isn’t possible to leave your emotions out of the
equation, managing yourself and your relationships means you first need to be
aware of the full range of your feelings, both positive and negative.
When you don’t take time out to notice and understand your emotions, they
have a strange way of resurfacing when you least expect or want them to. It’s
their way of trying to bring something important to your attention. They will
persist, and the damage will mount, until you take notice.
Facing the truth about who you are can at times be unsettling. Getting in
touch with your emotions and tendencies takes honesty and courage. Be patient
and give yourself credit for even the smallest bits of forward momentum. As you
start noticing things about yourself that you weren’t previously aware of (things
you aren’t always going to like), you are progressing.
The remainder of this chapter introduces you to 15 original strategies, which
were designed to help you maximize your self-awareness to create positive
changes in your life. The strategies are straightforward and packed full of
insights and examples that will help your self-awareness grow.
SELF-AWARENESS STRATEGIES
1. Quit Treating Your Feelings as Good or Bad
2. Observe the Ripple Effect from Your Emotions
3. Lean into Your Discomfort
4. Feel Your Emotions Physically
5. Know Who and What Pushes Your Buttons
6. Watch Yourself Like a Hawk . . .
7. Keep a Journal about Your Emotions
8. Don’t Be Fooled by a Bad Mood
9. Don’t Be Fooled by a Good Mood, Either
10. Stop and Ask Yourself Why You Do the Things You Do
11. Visit Your Values
12. Check Yourself
13. Spot Your Emotions in Books, Movies, and Music
14. Seek Feedback
15. Get to Know Yourself under Stress
1 Quit Treating Your Feelings as
Good or Bad
It’s human nature to want to create two simple and easy piles of emotions: the
good ones and the bad ones. For instance, most people would automatically
classify guilt as bad. You don’t want to feel it—you might even beat yourself up
about it—and you do whatever you can to get rid of it. Likewise, we tend to let
good emotions like excitement run wild. We pump ourselves up and feed off the
energy.
The downfall of attaching such labels to your emotions is that judging your
emotions keeps you from really understanding what it is that you are feeling.
When you allow yourself to sit with an emotion and become fully aware of it,
you can understand what is causing it. Suspending judgment of emotions allows
them to run their course and vanish. Passing judgment on whether you should or
shouldn’t be feeling what you are feeling just heaps more emotions on top of the
pile and prevents the original feeling from running its course.
Suspending judgment of emotions allows them to run their course and
vanish.
So, the next time you feel an emotion begin to build, take notice of it
immediately. Refrain from putting it into the good or bad pile and remind
yourself that the feeling is there to help you understand something important.
2 Observe the Ripple Effect from Your Emotions
Consider for a moment what happens when you drop a stone into water. The
stone’s swift plummet pierces the water’s surface, sending ripples in all
directions. Your outpourings of emotion are like stones that send ripples through
the people in your life. Since emotions are the primary drivers of your behavior,
it’s important you understand the effect they have on other people.
Let’s say a manager loses his cool and berates an employee in front of the
rest of the team. When the lashing happens, it may seem that the manager’s
target is the only one whose feelings get bruised, but the ripple effect from the
manager’s explosion affects all who witnessed it. As the rest of the team
members wander back to their desks, the others, too, feel the manager’s wrath.
They go back to work with a pit in their stomachs, each one wondering when his
or her turn will come up.
The manager thinks his tirade was good for productivity because the rant
“scared people straight,” but their fear soon settles into caution. To perform at
their best, the team members need to take risks, stretch themselves beyond their
comfort zone, and even make some mistakes along the way. No one on the team
wants to be the manager’s next target, so the team members play it safe and do
only as they are told. When the manager gets docked a year later for leading a
team that fails to take initiative, he wonders what’s wrong with the team.
Your emotions are powerful weapons, and continuing to think that their
effects are instant and minimal will only do you a disservice. The key to
observing the ripple effects of your emotions is to watch closely how they
impact other people immediately, and then use that information as a guide for
how your emotions are bound to affect a wider circle long after you unleash the
emotion. To fully understand the ripple effects of your emotions, you’ll need to
spend some time reflecting upon your behavior. You’ll also need to ask other
people how they are affected by your emotions. The more you understand how
your emotions ripple outward, the better equipped you’ll be to choose the type of
ripples that you want to create.
3 Lean into Your Discomfort
The biggest obstacle to increasing your self-awareness is the tendency to avoid
the discomfort that comes from seeing yourself as you really are. Things you do
not think about are off your radar for a reason: they can sting when they surface.
Avoiding this pain creates problems, because it is merely a short-term fix. You’ll
never be able to manage yourself effectively if you ignore what you need to do
to change.
Rather than avoiding a feeling, your goal should be to move toward the
emotion, into it, and eventually through it. This can be said for even mild
emotional discomfort, such as boredom, confusion, or anticipation. When you
ignore or minimize an emotion, no matter how small or insignificant, you miss
the opportunity to do something productive with that feeling. Even worse,
ignoring your feelings does not make them go away; it just helps them to surface
again when you least expect them.
Rather than avoiding a feeling, your goal should be to move toward the
emotion, into it, and eventually through it.
To be effective in life, we all need to discover our own arrogance—those
things we don’t bother to learn about and dismiss as unimportant. One person
thinks apologies are for sissies, so she never learns to recognize when one is
needed. Another person hates feeling down, so he constantly distracts himself
with meaningless activity and never really feels content. Both people need to
take the bold step of leaning into the feelings that will motivate them to change.
Otherwise, they will continue down an unproductive, unsatisfying path,
repeating the same patterns over and over again.
After the first few times you lean into your discomfort, you will quickly find
that the discomfort isn’t so bad, it doesn’t ruin you, and it reaps rewards. The
surprising thing about increasing your self-awareness is that just thinking about
it will help you change, even though much of your focus will initially be on the
things you do “wrong.” Don’t be afraid of your emotional “mistakes.” They tell
you what you should be doing differently and provide the steady stream of
information you need to understand yourself as life unfolds.
4 Feel Your Emotions Physically
When you experience an emotion, electric signals course through your brain and
trigger physical sensations in your body. The physical sensations can be as
varied as your stomach muscles tightening, your heart rate increasing, your
breathing quickening, or your mouth going dry. Because your mind and body are
so tightly connected, one of the most effective ways to understand your emotions
as they are happening is to learn how to spot the physical changes that
accompany your emotions.
To better understand the physical effects of your emotions, try closing your
eyes the next time you have a few moments alone. Feel how fast or slow your
heart is beating. Notice the pace of your breathing. Determine how tense or
relaxed the muscles are in your arms, legs, neck, and back. Now, think of a
couple of events from your life—one positive and one negative—that generate
strong emotions. Think through one of these events in enough detail that you can
feel your emotions stir. Take note of the physical changes that accompany the
feelings. Do they make your breathing or heart rate change? Do your muscles
grow tense? Do you feel hotter or colder? Repeat this process with the other
event, and take note of the physical differences in the emotions from the positive
and negative experiences.
Closing your eyes and thinking of emotionally arousing events is simply
training for the real thing—spotting the physical signs of your emotions on the
fly. In the beginning, try not to think too hard—simply open your mind to
noticing the sensations. As you improve at this, you’ll find that you’re often
physically aware of an emotion long before you’re mentally aware of it.
5 Know Who and What Pushes
Your Buttons
We all have buttons—pet peeves, triggers, whatever you want to call them—that,
when pushed, just irritate and irk us until we want to scream. Perhaps you have a
coworker who lives her life as if she were constantly on stage. Her entrance into
meetings is dramatic and flaring, and she feeds off the energy from everyone’s
attention and uses that energy to take control of the room. Her voice is louder
than most, and her contributions to the meetings are always long-winded novels,
as if she just loves to hear herself talk.
If your modus operandi is more subtle (or you really would like part of that
stage yourself), a person like that may really eat at you. When you go into a
meeting with great ideas and a readiness to just sit down and get straight to the
point, a drama queen who is creating a stage in the boardroom is bound to flip
your switches for frustration and rage. Even if you aren’t the type to blurt out
impulsive comments or otherwise go on the attack, your body language may
give you away, or you may find yourself on the drive home obsessing over your
lingering frustration.
Knowing who pushes your buttons and how they do it is critical to
developing the ability to take control of these situations, maintain your poise,
and calm yourself down. To use this strategy, you can’t think about things
generally. You need to pinpoint the specific people and situations that trigger
your emotions. Your buttons are bound to get pushed by a wide range of people
and things. It could be certain people (like drama queens), particular situations
(like feeling scared or caught off guard), or conditions in the environment (like
noisy offices). Having a clear understanding of who and what pushes your
buttons makes these people and situations a bit less difficult because they come
as less of a surprise.
You can take your self-awareness a big step further by discovering the source
of your buttons. That is, why do these people and situations irk you so much
when other, equally annoying people and situations don’t bother you at all?
Perhaps the stage hog reminds you of your sister who got all the attention when
you were younger. You lived many years in her shadow, vowing to never let it
happen again. Now you sit beside her clone in every meeting. No wonder she’s a
trigger for your emotions.
Knowing why your buttons are what they are opens doors to managing your
reactions to your triggers. For now, your tasks are simple—find the sources of
your buttons and jot down a list. Knowing your buttons is essential to using the
self-and relationship management strategies that come later in the book.
6 Watch Yourself Like a Hawk . . .
Hawks have the distinct advantage of soaring hundreds of feet above the ground,
looking down upon the Earth and seeing all that happens below them. The
creatures on the ground go about their lives with narrow tunnel vision, not even
realizing that the hawk is soaring above them predicting their every move.
Wouldn’t it be great to be the hawk, looking down upon yourself in those sticky
situations that tend to get the better of you? Think of all the things you would be
able to see and understand from above. Your objectivity would allow you to step
out from under the control of your emotions and know exactly what needed to be
done to create a positive outcome.
Even though you are not a hawk, you can still develop a more objective
understanding of your own behavior. You can practice by taking notice of your
emotions, thoughts, and behaviors right as the situation unfolds. In essence, the
goal is to slow yourself down and take in all that is in front of you, allowing your
brain to process all available information before you act.
Consider an example. Let’s say you have a teenage son who is more than two
hours late for his Friday night curfew. You’re sitting in a living room chair in the
dark, waiting for him to stroll through the door and offer another creative
explanation for why he’s late and wasn’t answering his phone. The more you sit
there thinking about your son’s disregard for your authority and the hours of
sleep he’s just robbed you of, the more your blood boils. Before long, you’ve
forgotten the real reason you’re so upset—you’re worried about his safety. Sure,
you want him to obey the rules, but it’s the thought of him out there acting
recklessly that’s keeping you up.
Watching yourself like a hawk in this situation requires taking advantage of
this calm before the storm. You know your anger is going to rumble to the
surface the moment his weak excuses tumble from his mouth, and you also know
he’s more likely to follow your rules if you can get him to see and feel your
concern. This is the moment when you need to consider what this situation looks
like from above. You realize your brooding is just fanning the flames of your
anger. You remember that he’s a good kid who’s been acting too much like a
typical teenager lately. You know your anger isn’t going to make him change; it
hasn’t worked thus far. The bigger picture now in clear view, you decide to
explain the rationale for his punishment and why you are so upset, rather than
just fly off the handle. When he finally comes slithering into the house, knocking
the lamp off the end table in the darkness, you’re grateful you can see the whole
picture and not just what’s in front of you.
7 Keep a Journal about Your Emotions
The biggest challenge to developing self-awareness is objectivity. It’s hard to
develop perspective on your emotions and tendencies when every day feels like
a new mountain to climb. With a journal, you can record what events triggered
strong emotions in you and how you responded to them.
You should write about time spent at work and home—nothing is off limits.
In just a month, you’ll begin to see patterns in your emotions, and you’ll develop
a better understanding of your tendencies. You’ll get a better idea of which
emotions get you down, which pick you up, and which are the most difficult for
you to tolerate. Pay careful attention to the people and situations that push your
buttons, triggering strong emotions. Describe the emotions you feel each day,
and don’t forget to record the physical sensations that accompany the emotions.
The biggest challenge to developing self-awareness is objectivity.
In addition to helping you see yourself more clearly, writing down your
emotions makes your tendencies much easier to remember, and the journal
serves as a great reference as you raise your self-awareness.
8 Don’t Be Fooled by a Bad Mood
We all succumb to them every now and then—those down-in-the-dumps moods
where nothing seems to be going our way. When you feel this way, your low
mood puts a dark cloud over every thought, feeling, and experience you have.
The tricky thing about your brain is that, once a negative mood takes over, you
lose sight of what’s good in your life, and suddenly you hate your job, you’re
frustrated with family and friends, you’re dissatisfied with your
accomplishments, and your optimism about the future goes out the window.
Deep down, you know that things aren’t as bad as they seem, but your brain just
won’t hear it.
Part of self-awareness is knowing what you’re going through even if you
can’t totally change it. Admit to yourself that your bad mood is hanging a cloud
over everything you see, and remind yourself that your moods are not
permanent. Your emotions change all the time, and low moods will pass if you
allow them to.
When you’re stuck in a down mood, it’s not a good time to make important
decisions. You’ll have to remain aware of the mood and understand it if you
hope to keep it from leading you to make mistakes that will only pull you down
further. Not only is it OK to reflect upon recent events that may have brought on
the mood, but this is also a good idea—as long as you don’t dwell on them for
too long—because often that’s all it takes to get the mood to pass.
9 Don’t Be Fooled by a Good Mood, Either
Bad moods and negative emotions are not the only ones that cause trouble. A
good mood can deceive your thinking just as much as a bad one. When you are
feeling excited and really happy, it’s easy to do something that you’ll regret.
Consider this familiar scenario: your favorite store is having a once-a-year
sale with markdowns of up to 75%. You rush into the store on the day of the sale
and end up buying all sorts of things that you’ve always wanted but can’t really
afford (at least not all at once). The rush and exhilaration of your purchases carry
you through the week as you show off the goods to your friends and family and
let them in on the fabulous deals you got. When your credit card bill arrives at
the end of the month, it’s another story.
Foolish spending is not the only mistake you can make while riding the high
of a great mood. The excitement and energy you enjoy during a good mood paint
a rosy picture of all you encounter. This leaves you far more likely to make
impulsive decisions that ignore the potential consequences of your actions. Stay
aware of your good moods and the foolish decisions these moods can lead to,
and you’ll be able to enjoy feeling good without any regrets.
10 Stop and Ask Yourself Why You Do the Things You Do
Emotions come when they will, not when you will them to. Your self-awareness
will grow abundantly when you begin seeking out the source of your feelings.
Get in the habit of stopping to ask yourself why surprising emotions rumbled to
the surface and what motivated you to do something out of character. Emotions
serve an important purpose—they clue you into things that you’ll never
understand if you don’t take the time to ask yourself why.
Most of the time, it really is that easy, but when you are left to your own
devices, the days can just whiz by with little time to contemplate why you do
what you do. With a little practice, you can trace your emotional reactions back
to their origins and understand the purpose of your emotions. The surprising
thing about this strategy is that just paying attention to your emotions and asking
yourself good questions like these are enough to help you improve. Can you
remember the first time you reacted like this and with whom? Are there
similarities between then and now? Can anyone evoke this reaction in you or
only specific people? The better you understand why you do the things you do,
the better equipped you’ll be to keep your emotions from running the show.
11 Visit Your Values
The plates of life are constantly spinning above you. You juggle projects at
work, never-ending meetings, bills, errands, emails, phone calls, text messages,
chores, meals, time with friends and family—the list goes on. It takes great
amounts of attention and focus to keep the plates from crashing to the ground.
Maintaining this balancing act keeps your attention focused outward, rather
than inward and on yourself. As you run around struggling to check your daily
“to dos” off your list, it’s easy to lose sight of what’s really important to you—
your core values and beliefs. Before you know it, you find yourself doing and
saying things that deep down you don’t feel good about or believe in. This could
mean you find yourself yelling at a coworker who made a mistake, when you
normally find such hostility unacceptable. If yelling at your colleagues runs
contrary to the beliefs you wish to live your life by, catching yourself (or being
caught) doing it is bound to make you uncomfortable and even unfulfilled.
The trick here is to take the time to check in with yourself and jot down your
core beliefs and values. Ask yourself, what are the values that I wish to live my
life by? Take a sheet of paper and separate it into two columns. List your core
values and beliefs in the left column and anything that you’ve done or said
recently that you aren’t proud of in the right column. Is what you value in
alignment with the manner in which you conduct yourself? If not, consider
alternatives to what you said and did that would have made you proud of
yourself, or at least more comfortable.
Repeating this exercise somewhere between daily and monthly will be a
huge boost to your self-awareness. Before long, you’ll find yourself thinking of
the list before you act, which will set the stage for making choices you can live
with.
12 Check Yourself
Self-awareness is generally an internal process, but there are a few instances in
which the outside holds the clues you need to understand what’s going on inside.
Without question, how you feel is reflected in how you look. Your facial
expressions, posture, demeanor, clothes, and even your hair all say important
things about your mood.
Physical appearance is more straightforward—what you wear sends a pretty
clear, established message about how you feel. For example, wearing old
sweatpants and ratty T-shirts and having disheveled hair every day tells the
world you’ve given up, while overdressing for every occasion and never missing
your weekly haircut lets people know you are trying too hard. Your demeanor
also says a lot about your mood, but the message often gets twisted. If you’re
meeting someone for the first time and you’re feeling insecure about how you’ll
be received, like many people, you may tend to be aloof and a bit standoffish or
get overzealous.
When you find yourself in similar situations, it’s important to notice your
mood and consider its influence upon your demeanor. Is the look that you are
projecting to the world one that you have chosen, one that your mood created, or
one that you tend to lean on by default? Certainly, what you project reflects how
you feel, and it’s up to you to understand it. Taking a moment here and there to
check yourself will allow you to understand your mood before it sets the tone for
the rest of your day.
13 Spot Your Emotions in Books,
Movies, and Music
If you’re having trouble looking within to spot your emotional patterns and
tendencies, you can discover the same information by looking outside yourself at
the movies, music, and books that you identify with. When the lyrics or mood of
a song resonate with you, they say a lot about how you feel, and when a
character from a movie or book sticks in your head, it’s probably because
important aspects of his or her thoughts and feelings parallel your own. Taking a
closer look in these moments can teach you a lot about yourself. It can also
provide a great tool for explaining your feelings to other people.
Finding your emotions in the expressions of artists allows you to learn about
yourself and discover feelings that are often hard to communicate. Sometimes
you just can’t find the words to say what you are feeling until you see it in front
of you. Listening to music, reading novels, watching films, and even looking at
art can act as a gateway into your deepest emotions. Take a closer look the next
time one of these mediums grabs your attention—you never know what you’ll
find.
14 Seek Feedback
Everything you see—including yourself—must travel through your own lens.
The problem is, your lens is tainted by your experiences, your beliefs, and,
without question, your moods. Your lens prevents you from ever obtaining a
truly objective look at yourself, on your own. Often, there is a big difference
between how you see yourself and how others see you. This chasm between the
way you view yourself and the way others view you is a rich source of lessons
that will build your self-awareness.
Self-awareness is the process of getting to know yourself from the inside out
and the outside in. The only way to get the second, more elusive perspective is to
open yourself up to feedback from others, which can include friends, coworkers,
mentors, supervisors, and family. When you ask for their feedback, be sure to get
specific examples and situations, and as you gather the answers, look for
similarities in the information. Others’ views can be a real eye-opener by
showing you how other people experience you. Putting the perspectives together
helps you see the entire picture, including how your emotions and reactions
affect other people. By mustering the courage to peer at what others see, you can
reach a level of self-awareness that few people attain.
Self-awareness is the process of getting to know yourself from the inside
out and the outside in.
15 Get to Know Yourself under Stress
The mountain of stressors in your life is constantly growing. Every time your
stress tolerance rises to new heights, you—or those around you—push and push
until you take on more. All of the high-tech gadgets at your disposal aren’t
helping, either. If anything, they just seem to speed up your life. If you are like
most people, you already recognize some of the warning signs that pop up when
stress is looming. The question is: do you heed their warning?
You will benefit tremendously from learning to recognize your first signs of
stress. The human mind and body—at least when it comes to stress—have
voices of their own. They tell you through emotional and physiological reactions
when it’s time to slow down and take a break. For example, an upset stomach
can be a sign that nervousness and anxiety are overwhelming your body. The
indigestion and fatigue that follow are your body’s way of taking some time off
to rest. For you, intense stress and anxiety may create an upset stomach, while
for others the physical signs can be a pounding headache, canker sores, or their
backs going out. Your self-awareness in times of stress should serve as your third
ear to listen to your body’s cries for help. Your body speaks volumes when you
push it too hard. Take the time to recognize these signals and recharge your
emotional battery before your stress causes permanent damage to your system.
S
6
SELF-MANAGEMENT
STRATEGIES
elf-management is your ability to use awareness of your emotions to actively
choose what you say and do. On the surface, it may seem that selfmanagement
is simply a matter of taking a deep breath and keeping yourself in
check when emotions come on strong, and while it’s true that self-control in
these situations is a sizeable piece of the pie, there’s far more to selfmanagement
than putting a cork in it when you’re about to blow up. Your
eruptions are no different from a volcano—there is all sorts of rumbling
happening beneath the surface before the lava starts flowing.
Unlike a volcano, there are subtle things you can do each and every day to
influence what is happening beneath the surface. You just need to learn how to
pick up on the rumbling and respond to it. Self-management builds upon a
foundational skill—self-awareness. Ample self-awareness is necessary for
effective self-management because you can only choose how to respond to an
emotion actively when you’re aware of it. Since we’re hard-wired to experience
emotions before we can respond to them, it’s the one-two punch of reading
emotions effectively and then reacting to them that sets the best self-managers
apart. A high level of self-management ensures you aren’t getting in your own
way and doing things that limit your success. It also ensures you aren’t
frustrating other people to the point that they resent or dislike you. When you
understand your own emotions and can respond the way you choose to them,
you have the power to take control of difficult situations, react nimbly to change,
and take the initiative needed to achieve your goals.
When you develop the ability to size yourself up quickly and grab the reins
before you head in the wrong direction, it keeps you flexible and allows you to
choose positively and productively how to react to different situations. When
you don’t stop to think about your feelings—including how they are influencing
your behavior now, and will continue to do so in the future—you set yourself up
to be a frequent victim of emotional hijackings. Whether you’re aware of it or
not, your emotions will control you, and you’ll move through your day reacting
to your feelings with little choice in what you say and do.
The remainder of this chapter presents 17 specific strategies—things you can
start doing today—that will help you manage your emotions to your benefit.
Each simple strategy is targeted to an important element of the self-management
skill. This carefully crafted set has been honed through many years of testing
with people just like you, and are proven methods for increasing your selfmanagement
skill.
As you master each of the strategies and incorporate them into your daily
routine, you will develop an increased capacity to respond effectively to your
emotions. Of course no matter how skilled you become in managing your
emotions there are always going to be situations that push your buttons. Your life
won’t morph into a fairy tale devoid of obstacles, but you will equip yourself
with everything you need to take the wheel and drive.
SELF-MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES
1. Breathe Right
2. Create an Emotion vs. Reason List
3. Make Your Goals Public
4. Count to Ten
5. Sleep On It
6. Talk To a Skilled Self-Manager
7. Smile and Laugh More
8. Set Aside Some Time in Your Day for Problem Solving
9. Take Control of Your Self-Talk
10. Visualize Yourself Succeeding
11. Clean Up Your Sleep Hygiene
12. Focus Your Attention on Your Freedoms Rather than Your Limitations
13. Stay Synchronized
14. Speak to Someone Who is Not Emotionally Invested in Your Problem
15. Learn a Valuable Lesson from Everyone You Encounter
16. Put a Mental Recharge into Your Schedule
17. Accept That Change is Just around the Corner
1 Breathe Right
If you’re like most people, you breathe in short, shallow breaths throughout the
day that don’t fully contract your diaphragm to fill your lungs—and you don’t
even know it. What’s to stop you? It’s not like you are suffering from the lack of
oxygen . . . or so you think. Your lungs are built to provide precisely the amount
of air your body needs for all of your organs to function effectively. When you
take shallow breaths—which is any breath that fails to make your stomach
protrude outward from the influx of air—you aren’t giving your body the full
amount of oxygen it needs.
Your brain demands a full 20 percent of your body’s oxygen supply, which it
needs to control basic functions like breathing and sight and complex functions
like thinking and managing your mood. Your brain dedicates oxygen first to the
basic functions, because they keep you alive. Whatever oxygen remains is used
for the complex functions, which keep you alert, focused, and calm. Shallow
breaths deprive your brain of oxygen, which can lead to poor concentration,
forgetfulness, mood swings, restlessness, depressed and anxious thoughts, and a
lack of energy. Shallow breathing handicaps your ability to self-manage.
The next time you are in a stressful or emotional situation, focus on taking
slow deep breaths, inhaling through your nose until you can feel your stomach
swell outward and grow tight, and then exhaling gently and completely through
your mouth. As you exhale, go ahead and push that breath out until you have
completely emptied your lungs. If you want to make sure that you are breathing
correctly, place one hand upon your sternum (the long, flat bone located in the
center of your chest) and the other hand upon your stomach as you take in
breaths. If the hand on your stomach is moving more than the hand on your
sternum as you exhale, then you know that you’re getting enough oxygen and
fully inflating your lungs. If you practice this proper breathing technique, it will
grow comfortable enough that you can do it in the presence of other people
without them noticing, which is handy for when you find yourself in the middle
of a difficult conversation.
Anytime you choose to breathe right and flood your brain with oxygen,
you’ll notice the effects immediately. Many people describe the sensation as one
of entering a calmer, more relaxed state where they have a clear head. This
makes breathing right one of the simplest yet most powerful techniques that you
have at your disposal to manage your emotions. In addition to engaging your
rational brain on the spot, breathing right is a great tool for shifting your focus
away from intruding, uncomfortable thoughts that are hard to shake. Whether
you are overcome by anxiety and stress because of a looming deadline, or
fixated on negative thoughts and feelings about something that happened in the
past, making yourself breathe right calms you down and makes you feel better
by powering up your rational brain.
2 Create an Emotion vs. Reason List
You may not always realize it, but there are many times when you allow your
emotions to sway you in one direction while your rational mind is tugging at
your shirt to go another way. Whenever you find your mind having a battle of
the brains (emotional vs. rational), it’s time to make a list that distinguishes the
emotional side of the argument from the rational one. The list will allow you to
clear your mind, use your knowledge and take into account the importance of
your emotions without letting them take control.
Creating an Emotion vs. Reason list is simple. Draw a straight line down the
middle of a page to make two columns. In the left column write what your
emotions are telling you to do, and in the right column what your reason is
telling you to do. Now, ask yourself two important questions: Where are your
emotions clouding your judgment, and where is your reason ignoring important
cues from your emotions? Your emotions will create trouble if you let them lead
you around without any reason, but your rational thoughts can be just as
problematic if you try to operate like a robot that is without feeling. Your
feelings are there whether you acknowledge them or not, and the Emotion vs.
Reason list forces you to get in touch with them by putting them down on paper.
So, the next time a sticky or stressful situation gives you grief, grab a sheet
of paper and give yourself a few quiet moments to organize your thoughts and
make your list. With the list in front of you, it will be much easier to see whether
you should allow the emotional or rational sides of your thinking to have more
say in your decision.
3 Make Your Goals Public
Walking your talk is hard, especially when life is always throwing you
curveballs. Sometimes, the biggest letdowns are private ones—when we fail to
reach a goal or do what we set out to do. There is no more powerful motivator to
reach your goals than making them public. If you clearly tell other people what
you are setting out to accomplish—be it friends, family or a spouse—their
awareness of your progress creates an incredible sense of accountability.
Much of self-management comes down to motivation, and you can use the
expectations that other people have of you as a powerful force to get you up off
the proverbial couch. If your boss assigns a project or your running partner
meets you every morning at 5 a.m. sharp, you’re simply more likely to do
something when other people are involved. Select those people whom you know
will actually pay attention to your progress. When you share your goals with
someone, ask him or her to monitor your progress and hold you accountable.
You may even give them the power to dole out reward or punishment, such as
the university professor we know who pays his colleagues $100 anytime he
misses a deadline on a research article. As you can imagine, he is the rare
individual who hardly ever misses a deadline!
Much of self-management comes down to motivation, and you can use the
expectations that other people have of you as a powerful force to get you
up off the proverbial couch.
4 Count to Ten
You can thank your kindergarten teacher for this one! It was way back then
sitting on the classroom rug with your legs crossed that you learned one of the
most effective strategies for turning the temperature down when your emotions
are running hot. Adulthood has a funny way of making us lose sight of some
simple, yet profound, strategies for self-control.
All you have to do is this: When you feel yourself getting frustrated or angry,
stop yourself by taking in a deep breath and saying the number one to yourself as
you exhale. Keep breathing and counting until you reach the number ten. The
counting and breathing will relax you and stop you from taking rash action long
enough to regain your composure and develop a more clear, rational perspective
of the situation.
Sometimes, you might not even reach ten. For example, if you are in a
meeting and someone abruptly interrupts you to blurt out something ridiculous
that rubs you raw, you are unlikely to sit there silently while you breathe your
way to ten. Even if you don’t make it to double digits, you’ll stop the flow of
frustration and anger long enough to cool down your overheated limbic system
and give your rational brain some valuable time to catch up.
When your counting needs to be more subtle, there are lots of great ways to
hide it from others. Some people will actually bring a beverage with them to
every meeting they attend. This way, whenever they feel as though they may
blurt out some emotionally charged statement, they take a drink. No one expects
them to talk when they are drinking. So they have the time they need to calm
down (and count if necessary), organize their thoughts, and plan something to
say that’s more constructive.
Even if you don’t make it to double digits, you’ll stop the flow of
frustration and anger long enough to cool down your overheated limbic
system and give your rational brain some valuable time to catch up.
Reacting quickly and without much thought fans the flames burning in the
emotional brain. Since a snappy comeback usually leads to a heated exchange
where barbs are thrown back and forth, it’s easy to find yourself in the midst of a
full-blown emotional hijacking. When you slow things down and focus on
counting, it engages your rational brain. You can then regain control of yourself
and keep your emotions from running the show.
5 Sleep On It
In the timeless classic, War and Peace, Leo Tolstoy wrote that the two strongest
warriors are time and patience. The power of these warriors comes from their
ability to transform situations, ease pain, and provide clarity. Sometimes
situations that require our patience can feel so uncomfortable, dissatisfying, and
rife with anxiety that we jump to action just to alleviate the internal turmoil. But
more often than not, giving yourself that extra day, week, or month to digest the
situation before moving forward is all you need to stay in control. And
sometimes, while you’re waiting, things may surface that make your decision
that much easier to make.
Time helps you to self-manage because it brings clarity and perspective to
the thousands of thoughts that go swimming through your head when something
is important. Time also helps you to gain control of emotions that you know
would lead you in the wrong direction if you were to let them drive. It’s that
simple. All you need to do is force yourself to wait for the dust to settle before
you make a move.
6 Talk To a Skilled Self-Manager
Role models come in all shapes and sizes, and they influence our lives in ways
that are hard to predict. One of the most powerful ways to learn selfmanagement
is to seek out skilled self-managers to learn their tricks.
Most people’s weaknesses in emotional intelligence are simply the product
of skills that don’t come naturally to them. In the case of people who are gifted
in an emotional intelligence skill, they are usually very aware of what it is they
do well, which makes it easy for you to learn from them.
First, find a person whom you consider to be a master self-manager. If you
don’t feel that you can spot a skilled self-manager on your own, you can always
have someone take the test that comes with this book. Offer to take your selfmanagement
whiz out for lunch or coffee, explain that you are seeking
improvement in this skill, and ask him or her to review the self-management
section of this book before the meeting. During the meeting share your specific
goals for improved self-management, and ask what tactics he or she relies on to
self-manage so well. Be sure to share the emotions and situations that give you
the most trouble. You’re bound to learn some unique and effective ways to
manage yourself that you would have otherwise never been exposed to. Before
you leave the meeting, write down the best tips and choose a couple that you can
begin trying immediately. Ask your self-management whiz if the two of you can
meet again after you’ve had a chance to try the suggestions out.
7 Smile and Laugh More
Did you know that when you laugh and smile, your face sends signals to your
brain that you are happy? Your brain literally responds to the nerves and muscles
in your face to determine your emotional state. So what does this mean for selfmanagement?
When you’re stuck on a frustrating or distressing thought, forcing
yourself to smile counteracts the negative emotional state. If you work in
customer service, or any time you need to look upbeat when you’re really not up
for it, making yourself throw on a large, legitimate smile (where your cheeks
push upwards) will trick your mind into feeling the mood you need for the
moment.
French university researchers measured the power of a smile by having two
groups of subjects read the same comics page from the newspaper. One group of
subjects was instructed to hold a pencil in their teeth while reading (which
activates the muscles used in smiling), while the other group held the pencil with
their lips (which does not activate the muscles used in smiling). Those who were
unknowingly “smiling” found the cartoons far more humorous and had a better
time while reading them than people in the group that weren’t smiling.
You can also use smiling and laughter to lift your mood by watching a show
or reading a book that you know you find funny. This can feel like an odd choice
when you’re feeling down, but it’s a great way to override the negative emotions
and clear your head, especially if your down mood is paralyzing your judgment.
Smiling and laughter won’t eliminate feeling down, and they shouldn’t—every
mood has its purpose—but it’s nice to know you have an out when you need to
put on a happy face.
. . . it’s nice to know you have an out when you need to put on a happy
face.
8 Set Aside Some Time in Your Day
for Problem Solving
You experience hundreds of emotions every day, some of which you are not even
aware. You spend your day bouncing around from feeling to feeling, which can
lead to making some decisions at inopportune times.
Think back through some of your recent decisions, and you’ll likely find that
the decisions you made while hurrying through your day were seldom as
effective as those made with some planning and clear thinking. The only way to
ensure that you have the right space to make good decisions is to set aside some
time in your schedule for problem solving. Just keep it simple. A 15-minute
period each day where you turn off your phone, walk away from your computer,
and take time to just think, is a great way to ensure your decisions aren’t
muddled by your emotions.
9 Take Control of Your Self-Talk
Research suggests the average person has about 50,000 thoughts every day.
Sound like a lot? It doesn’t stop there. Every time one of those 50,000 thoughts
takes place, chemicals are produced in your brain that can trigger reactions felt
throughout your body. There is a strong relationship between what you think and
how you feel, both physically and emotionally. Because you are always thinking
(much like breathing), you tend to forget that you are doing it. You likely don’t
even realize how much your thoughts dictate how you feel every hour of every
single day.
It’s impossible to try and track every single thought you have to see if it’s
having a positive or negative influence on your emotional state. The thoughts
that are most influential are those where you literally talk to yourself. Though
you might not realize you have these thoughts, we all have an internal voice
inside our head that affects our perception of things. We tell ourselves to keep
quiet, we congratulate ourselves on a job well done and we reprimand ourselves
for making poor decisions. Our thoughts are “talking” to us every day, and this
inner voice is called “self-talk.”
With thoughts, the primary vehicle for regulating your emotional flow, what
you allow yourself to think can rumble emotions to the surface, stuff them down
underground, and intensify and prolong any emotional experience. When a rush
of emotion comes over you, your thoughts turn the heat up or down. By learning
to control your self-talk, you can keep yourself focused on the right things and
manage your emotions more effectively.
Much of the time, your self-talk is positive and it helps you through your day
(“I’d better get ready for the meeting” or “I’m really looking forward to going
out to dinner tonight”). Your self-talk damages your ability to self-manage
anytime it becomes negative. Negative self-talk is unrealistic and self-defeating.
It can send you into a downward emotional spiral that makes it difficult to get
what you want from life.
What follow are the most common types of negative self-talk with the keys
to taking control of them and turning them around: 1. Turn I always or I never
into just this time or sometimes. Your actions are unique to the situation in front
of you, no matter how often you think you mess up. Make certain your thoughts
follow suit. When you start treating each situation as its own animal and stop
beating yourself up over every mistake, you’ll stop making your problems bigger
than they really are.
2. Replace judgmental statements like I’m an idiot with factual ones like I
made a mistake. Thoughts that attach a permanent label to you leave no
room for improvement. Factual statements are objective, situational, and help
you to focus on what you can change.
3. Accept responsibility for your actions and no one else’s. The blame game
and negative self-talk go hand in hand. If you are someone who often thinks
either it’s all my fault or it’s all their fault you are wrong most the time. It is
commendable to accept responsibility for your actions, but not when you
carry someone else’s burden. Likewise, if you’re always blaming others, it’s
time to take responsibility for your part.
10 Visualize Yourself Succeeding
This is another strategy that at first glance may appear too simple to be effective,
but it packs a powerful punch. Learning to self-manage well requires a lot of
practice. Yet, many of the situations that pose the greatest difficulty for you don’t
come up all that often. So, you’ll have a hard time forming the neural pathways
needed to make your new skills habitual . . . unless you learn to visualize.
Your brain has a difficult time distinguishing between what you see with
your eyes and what you visualize in your mind. In fact, MRI scans of people’s
brains taken while they are watching the sun set are virtually indistinguishable
from scans taken when the same people visualize a sunset in their mind. The
same brain regions are active in both scenarios.
Visualizing yourself managing your emotions and behavior effectively is a
great way to practice your new skills and make them into habits. For this to
work, you might want to do your visualization in a room that’s free from
distractions, as you’ll need to immerse yourself fully in the scenes playing out in
your head. A great time to visualize is before you go to bed at night. Just close
your eyes and visualize yourself in situations where you have the most difficulty
managing yourself. Focus on the details of each situation that make it so hard for
you to remain in control; concentrate on the sights and sounds you would
experience if you were actually there until you literally feel the same emotions.
Next, picture yourself acting the way you’d like to (i.e. calming your nerves and
proceeding confidently during a big presentation, dealing with someone who
pushes your buttons without losing your cool, etc.). Imagine yourself doing and
saying the right things and allow yourself to feel the satisfaction and positive
emotions that come from this. Not a bad way to end the day, don’t you think?
Use this strategy nightly and incorporate new, challenging situations as they
surface.
11 Clean Up Your Sleep Hygiene
Self-management requires patience, flexibility, and alertness, which are the first
things to go when you don’t get a good night’s sleep. Getting more sleep at night
will probably help you manage yourself better, but not necessarily. The critical
factor for an alert, focused, and balanced mind is the quality of your sleep, and
for quality sleep you need good sleep hygiene.
While you sleep, your brain literally recharges, shuffling through the day’s
memories and storing or discarding them (which causes dreams), so that you
wake up alert and clear-headed. Your brain is very fickle when it comes to sleep.
It needs to move through an elaborate series of cycles for you to wake feeling
rested. You can help this along and improve the quality of your sleep by
following these steps for good sleep hygiene:
1. Get twenty minutes of morning sunlight. Your eyes need at least twenty
minutes of pre-noon sunlight (cloudy days are fine) to reset your inner clock,
which makes it easier to fall asleep in the evening. The light can’t be filtered
by windows or sunglasses. So, take the glasses off and crack your car
windows on the way to work, or find some time to get outdoors before
lunch-time.
2. Turn off the computer at least two hours before bedtime. The light of a
computer screen right in front of your face late at night is similar enough to
sunlight that it tricks your brain, making it difficult to fall asleep and
disruptive to the quality of your sleep.
3. Keep your bed for sleeping. The best way to check out the moment you hit
the mattress is to avoid working or watching television in bed. Save your bed
for sleep and your body will respond.
4. Avoid caffeine, especially in the p.m. Caffeine has a six-hour half-life.
Have a cup of joe at eight a.m., and you’ll still have 25 percent of the
caffeine in your body at eight p.m. Caffeine keeps you from falling asleep
and is extremely disruptive to the quality of your sleep. It’s best avoided all
together, or at least taken in small amounts and only before noon.
12 Focus Your Attention on Your Freedoms, Rather than
Your Limitations
Life isn’t fair . . . there’s nothing you can do about it . . . it isn’t up to you. Moms
and dads tend to beat these mantras into their children’s heads as if there were
some secret Mommy and Daddy Handbook that instructed them to do so. What
your folks forgot to explain is that you always have a choice—a choice in how
you respond to what’s before you. Even when you can’t do or say anything to
change a difficult situation, you always have a say in your perspective of what’s
happening, which ultimately influences your feelings about it.
Many times you can’t change a situation or even the parties involved, but
that doesn’t mean it’s time for you to give up. When you find yourself thinking
that you have no control, take a closer look at how you are reacting to the
situation itself. Focusing on restrictions is not only demoralizing—it helps
negative feelings surface that confirm your sense of helplessness. You must take
accountability for what you have control over, and focus your energy on
remaining flexible and open-minded in spite of the situation.
13 Stay Synchronized
FBI agents spend much of their time trying to figure out whether suspects are
lying. They study body language, voice inflections, and eye contact. The biggest
clue that someone is lying occurs when synchrony—body language that matches
the emotions being expressed—is absent.
Synchrony is also an important tool for effective self-managers. When you
are doing a good job of managing your emotions, your body language will fit the
emotional tone of the situation. When you can’t keep your body language in
check, it is a clear sign that your emotions are getting the best of you.
When a commercial airliner crash-landed safely in New York’s Hudson
River in 2009, the pilot, Chelsea “Sully” Sullenberger, saved every soul onboard
by making sure the plane hit the water at the exact angle and speed needed to
avoid breaking up upon impact. To accomplish this, he silenced the alarm bells
going off in his head and the fear he was feeling. He kept his composure by
directing his attention away from fear and onto landing the plane. He kept his
emotions from taking the controls, even though he knew the chances for survival
were slim.
On most days, you won’t be crash-landing airplanes, but, if you’re like most
people, you’ll have moments where your emotions are getting the better of you.
To keep yourself synchronized, direct your attention away from your emotions
and on to the task at hand.
14 Speak to Someone Who is Not
Emotionally Invested in Your Problem
When problems arise, your brain is constantly thinking, constantly sorting and
analyzing information to decide the best course of action. The problem is, the
only information your brain has to go on is what you’ve given it—what you’ve
seen before and what’s happening now. The way our minds are structured, it’s far
too easy to get stuck in a single train of thought. Allow this to happen and you’re
severely limiting your options.
It’s no wonder that it can be such a relief to talk to someone when you are
feeling confused or emotional about a situation. Not only is it helpful to talk to
someone who cares about how you are feeling, but new perspectives open up
additional avenues for you to explore.
When a difficult situation surfaces, seek out someone whom you trust and
feel comfortable with who is not personally affected by your situation. Use this
person as a sounding board for what you’ve experienced and what you are
thinking and feeling about the troubling situation. Their unique perspective will
help you to see things differently, and expand your options.
Choose your third party wisely. The people you invite to help you shouldn’t
have a vested interest in the situation. The more your “counselors” are
personally affected by the situation, the more their perspectives are going to be
tainted by their own needs and feelings. The opinions of people directly affected
by your situation will only muddy the waters for you and should be avoided at
all costs. You should also avoid someone you know will simply agree with you.
While their support feels good, it keeps you from seeing the entire picture.
Sitting down with a potential devil’s advocate may irk you in the moment, but
you’ll fare far better having seen things from a unique perspective.
15 Learn a Valuable Lesson from
Everyone You Encounter
Think back to a time when a conversation immediately put you on the defensive.
There you were, forcefully gripping your sword and shield, ready to do battle.
Maybe someone criticized you, or a colleague disagreed with you strongly, or
perhaps someone questioned your motives. As odd as it may sound, in moments
like these you are missing out on a valuable opportunity to learn from other
people. Approaching everyone you encounter as though they have something
valuable to teach you—something that you will benefit from—is the best way to
remain flexible, open-minded, and much less stressed.
You can do this with pretty much any situation that happens in your life.
Let’s say you are driving to work and someone cuts you off and then swerves
around a corner and motors off in another direction. Even this inconsiderate jerk
has something to teach you. Perhaps you need to learn to have more patience
with irritating people. Or it may make you grateful that you are not in such a
hurry. It is much more difficult to get angry, defensive, and stressed when you
are trying to learn something from the other party.
The next time you find yourself caught off-guard and on the defensive,
embrace this opportunity to learn something. Whether you learn from the other
person’s feedback, or just from how they are behaving, keeping this perspective
is the key to keeping yourself in control.
16 Put a Mental Recharge into
Your Schedule
The physical benefits of exercise are obvious, and there always seems to be
someone—a doctor, a friend, an article—reminding us that we need to do it
more. What most people don’t realize is how critical exercise and other relaxing
and recharging activities are to the mind. If you want to become an adept selfmanager,
you need to give your mind a fighting chance, and a lot of this,
surprisingly, comes down to how you treat your body.
When you take time out of your day to get your blood flowing and keep your
body healthy, it gives your mind an important break—the most significant rest
and recharge you can give your brain beyond sleep. While intense physical
activity is ideal, other more relaxing and equally invigorating diversions can also
have a great effect on your mind. Yoga, massage, gardening or a stroll through
the park are all relaxing ways to give your mind a breather. These activities—
though none more so than vigorous exercise—release chemicals in your brain
like serotonin and endorphins that recharge it and help to keep you happy and
alert. They also engage and strengthen areas in your brain that are responsible
for good decision-making, planning, organization, and rational thinking.
For most of us the biggest challenge in implementing this strategy is finding
the time to squeeze these things into our day. They tend to tumble down our
priority list as work, family, and friends monopolize our days. If you recognize
recharging your mind for what it is—a maintenance activity that’s as important
to your brain as brushing your teeth is for your mouth—it’s easier to schedule it
into your calendar at the start of the week, rather than waiting to see if you find
the time. If you want to improve your self-management skills, implementing this
strategy will be well worth the effort.
17 Accept That Change is Just
around the Corner
None of us is born with a crystal ball that predicts the future. Since you can’t
foresee every change and every obstacle that life throws in your path, the key to
navigating change successfully is your perspective before changes even surface.
The idea here is to prepare for change. This is not so much a guessing game
where you test your accuracy in anticipating what’s next, but rather thinking
through the consequences of potential changes so that you aren’t caught off
guard if they surface. The first step is to admit to yourself that even the most
stable, trusted facets of your life are not completely under your control. People
change, businesses go through ebbs and flows, and things just don’t stay the
same for long. When you allow yourself to anticipate change—and understand
your options if changes occur—you prevent yourself from getting bogged down
by strong emotions like shock, surprise, fear and disappointment when changes
actually happen. While you’re still likely to experience these negative emotions,
your acceptance that change is an inevitable part of life enables you to focus and
think rationally, which is critical to making the most out of an unlikely,
unwanted or otherwise unforeseen situation.
. . . admit to yourself that even the most stable, trusted facets of your life
are not completely under your control.
The best way to implement this strategy fully is to set aside a small amount
of time either every week or every other week to create a list of important
changes that you think could possibly happen. These are the changes you’ll want
to be prepared for. Leave enough room below each change on your list to write
out all the possible actions you will take should the change occur. And below
that, jot down ideas for things that you can do now to prepare for that change.
What are the signs that you can keep an eye out for that would suggest the
change is imminent? Should you see these signs, is there anything you can do to
prepare and soften the blow? Even if the changes on your list never come to
fruition, just anticipating change and knowing what you’d do in response to it
makes you a more flexible and adaptive person overall.
H
7
SOCIAL AWARENESS STRATEGIES
ave you ever had a coworker approach you, and without you saying
anything, he understood what kind of day you were having and where your
mind was wandering? He knew you must have come from a meeting with soand-
so because he could “see it” all over your face. He knew it was probably
time to let you vent, instead of asking for that favor he had in mind. He must
have picked up on something.
Or how about that waitress who seems to “just know” what each of her
customers need: one couple is in their own world and prefers to be alone;
another couple welcomes some fresh conversation from a new person, while
another table wants professional and polite service, minus the small talk.
Everyone’s sitting at a table to eat and drink and be served, and yet there’s so
much below the surface that makes each table unique. How does she quickly size
up these tables and know their needs?
Both this perceptive coworker and the waitress have a high level of social
awareness, a skill they use to recognize and understand the moods of other
individuals and entire groups of people. Though these two may be seasoned
veterans at this, it is a skill that they most likely learned and practiced over time.
Instead of looking inward to learn about and understand yourself, social
awareness is looking outward to learn about and appreciate others. Social
awareness is centered on your ability to recognize and understand the emotions
of others. Tuning into others’ emotions as you interact with them will help you
get a more accurate view of your surroundings, which affects everything from
relationships to the bottom line.
To build your social awareness skills, you will find yourself observing
people in all kinds of situations. You may be observing someone from afar while
you’re in a checkout line, or you may be right in the middle of a conversation
observing the person to whom you are speaking. You will learn to pick up on
body language, facial expressions, postures, tone of voice, and even what is
hidden beneath the surface, like deeper emotions and thoughts.
One of the intriguing things about building an acute sense of social
awareness is that emotions, facial expressions, and body language have been
shown to translate across many different cultures. You can use these skills
wherever you are.
The lens you look through must be clear. Making sure you are present and
able to give others your full attention is the first step to becoming more socially
aware. Looking outward isn’t just about using your eyes: it means tapping into
your senses. Not only can you fully utilize your basic five senses, but you can
also include the vast amount of information coming into your brain through your
sixth sense, your emotions. Your emotions can help you notice and interpret cues
other people send you. These cues will give you some help in putting yourself in
the other person’s shoes.
The 17 strategies in this section will help you tackle the obstacles that get in
your way and provide you with a helping hand when the going gets tough. You
can only attend to so much, so it’s critical to pick up on the right signals. These
proven social awareness strategies will help you do just that.
SOCIAL AWARENESS STRATEGIES
1. Greet People by Name
2. Watch Body Language
3. Make Timing Everything
4. Develop a Back-pocket Question
5. Don’t Take Notes at Meetings
6. Plan Ahead for Social Gatherings
7. Clear Away the Clutter
8. Live in the Moment
9. Go on a 15-minute Tour
10. Watch EQ at the Movies
11. Practice the Art of Listening
12. Go People Watching
13. Understand the Rules of the Culture Game
14. Test for Accuracy
15. Step into Their Shoes
16. Seek the Whole Picture
17. Catch the Mood of the Room
1 Greet People by Name
Maybe you’ve been named after a special relative or family friend, or maybe you
have a nickname that abbreviates your long last name. Whatever the story is
behind your name, it’s an essential part of your identity. It feels so good when
people use your name and remember it.
Greeting someone by name is one of the most basic and influential social
awareness strategies you can adopt. It’s a personal and meaningful way to
engage someone. If you have a tendency to withdraw in social situations,
greeting someone by name is a simple way to stick your neck out; using
someone’s name breaks down barriers and comes across as warm and inviting.
Even if you are a social butterfly, greeting people by name is a strategy to live
by.
Whatever the story is behind your name, it’s an essential part of your
identity. It feels so good when people use your name and remember it.
Enough said about the value of greeting by name. Now let’s talk about
following through. If names are usually on the tip of your tongue, you claim to
be “great with faces, but not names,” or you can’t seem to remember anyone’s
name 30 seconds after you hear it—make this the month to practice saying,
“Hello, [name],” to someone each time you enter a room and to those you’re
introduced to. Remembering a person’s name is a brain exercise—practice may
be required. If a name sounds unusual to you, ask the person to spell it for you so
you can picture the name written. This will help you remember it later. Be sure
to use the person’s name at least twice during the conversation.
Greeting people by their names not only acknowledges them as the essence
of who they are, but also allows you to remain connected to them in more than
just a superficial way. By making it a goal to remember someone’s name when
you meet or greet him or her, you are focusing your mind, which will only
increase your awareness in social situations.
2 Watch Body Language
Ask professional poker players what they study most carefully about their
opponents, and they will tell you they look for small changes in behavior that
indicate a player’s confidence in his hand.
They check posture, eye movement, hand gestures, and facial expressions.
The confident player with bravado is often the bluff, while the quiet hand is the
royal flush waiting to sneak up from behind. For professional poker players,
reading body language is a matter of winning or going home empty-handed.
Acute social awareness skills literally make or break them.
It’s just as important for us to become expert readers of body language; we’ll
know how people are really feeling and can plan an appropriate response. To get
a complete read from a person, do a head-to-toe body language assessment. Start
with the head and face. The eyes communicate more than any other part of the
human anatomy. You can get a lot of information from them, but be careful not
to stare. Maintained eye contact can show if a person is trustworthy, sincere, or
caring. Shifty eyes or too much blinking can suggest deception. People whose
eye movements are relaxed yet attentive to the person they are conversing with
are more sincere and honest.
Next, look at the person’s smile. Is it authentic or forced? Researchers can
tell the difference. They look for a crinkle of skin in the corner of the eyes, and if
it is not there, the smile is probably fake. Authentic smiles change rapidly from a
small facial movement to a broad open expression.
Once you’ve finished with the face, move to the shoulders, torso, and limbs.
Are the shoulders slouched or held naturally upright? Are the arms, hands, legs,
and feet calm or fidgety? The body communicates nonstop and is an abundant
source of information, so purposefully watch body language during meetings,
friendly encounters, and first introductions. Once you tune into body language,
its messages will become loud and clear, and you’ll soon notice cues and be able
to call someone’s bluff.
3 Make Timing Everything
You’ve probably heard the phrase “timing is everything” to explain hundreds of
situations and scenarios. When dealing with people and their emotions, timing
really is everything. You don’t ask for a raise when business is not going well,
you don’t try to correct someone who feels threatened by you, and you don’t ask
for a favor when someone is under a lot of stress or angry.
To practice your timing as it relates to social awareness, start working on
your timing with asking questions. The goal is to ask the right questions at the
right time with the right frame of mind, all with your audience in mind.
Just think about how it would go over if you were talking with a colleague
who is venting about her spouse. She is concerned about her marriage, and is
showing more emotion than ever. As a response, you blurt out the question,
“Have you thought about what ideas you have for the project proposal yet?” She
stares at you blankly and is blindsided by your question. Her face drops. The
conversation is over.
In this case, the timing, the question, and the frame of mind were wrong. You
asked the right question at the right time for you; but the time and frame of mind
of the other person were way off. Remember, this isn’t about you—it’s about the
other person. An appropriate question at that time for her frame of mind would
have been, “Is there anything I can do for you?” Most likely, she would’ve
appreciated your concern, and calmed down. At that point, you could’ve gently
asked your question, most likely acknowledging that the timing was still a little
off.
As you practice your timing, remember that the key to social awareness is
focusing on others, instead of on yourself, so that you can be more effective.
4 Develop a Back-pocket Question
Sometimes conversations just don’t go as planned. Either the other person isn’t
talking as much as you expected, or you are getting one-word answers. A 10-
second chunk of silence feels like an eternity; you cringe because it is so
awkward. You need to pull something out of your back pocket fast. How about a
handy back-pocket question?
A back-pocket question is what you use just in case to bail you out of any
awkward silence or uncomfortable moment. This social awareness strategy buys
you time so you can get to know someone better and shows the other person that
you are interested in his or her thoughts, feelings, and ideas. It can be something
like: “What do you think about [fill in blank]?” Pick from a handful of issues
that require some explanation like work or current events, but avoid politics,
religion, and other potentially sensitive areas.
The versatile conversationalist knows exactly when to pull out his or her
back-pocket question—the conversation needs a kick start, and you’re just not
ready to give up yet. It may feel like an abrupt subject change. Don’t worry; if it
injects life into the conversation, you’ve done well. If there’s still dead air, it
might be time to politely include someone else in the conversation or excuse
yourself to refill your beverage.
5 Don’t Take Notes at Meetings
It’s been hammered into our heads that if we want to be successful, we need to
learn to juggle a hectic workload and take on more and more. With multitasking,
the more you can juggle, the more successful you are, right? Wrong.
Multi-tasking actually sacrifices your quality of work, as the brain is simply
incapable of performing at a high level in multiple activities at once.
Let’s say you’re in a meeting where several ideas are being shared. Pros and
cons of each idea are tossed about the room. Though the notes are being
captured on flip-charts, you prefer to take your own so you don’t miss any
details. As you finish your last thoughts, suddenly Oscar’s voice shifts abruptly
from an even tone to one that’s clearly annoyed. A terse exchange between Oscar
and Melinda ensues. You review your notes and can’t find the cause of this shift.
What just happened? You missed critical details.
By having your head focused on your tablet and your hand scribbling away,
you miss the critical clues that shed some major light on how others are feeling
or what they may be thinking. Someone who wants the whole story and
complete picture observes others without the distraction of phones, typing, or
writing. Instead, he or she simply observes. Remember, the main goal of social
awareness is to recognize and understand how others are thinking and feeling. To
do this, you need to focus on other people.
A great place to observe others is at meetings. There’s already a captive
audience, and usually there’s minimal distraction with email and phone—but
there’s the mighty pen. At your next meeting, don’t take notes. Instead, look at
each person’s face and notice his or her expressions. Make eye contact with
whoever is speaking. You will feel more engaged and focused on others, and
pick up on things that pen and paper surely miss.
By having your head focused on your tablet and your hand scribbling
away, you miss the critical clues that shed some major light on how
others are feeling or what they may be thinking.
Note-taking certainly has its value. But it doesn’t have to be your modus
operandi, either. If you need to take notes for practical purposes, temporarily
stop at intervals to practice observation.
6 Plan Ahead for Social Gatherings
Picture yourself leaving a dinner party. You can’t believe you forgot to bring the
bread. You spent at least 10 minutes at the party beating yourself up over it, and
another 15 taking ribbing from your breadless yet good-natured friends. As you
put your keys in the ignition, you suddenly remember that you wanted to get
Jack’s business card to call him about a marketing venture, but the “bread
incident” got you off track. Then there’s Kate. She seemed down throughout
dinner. Why didn’t you ask her about it when you were there?
You planned to attend this dinner, but did you plan for it? Planning ahead for
an event can be your saving grace, whether the event’s a dinner party or a
meeting for work. If you walk through the door with a plan, you free up your
mental energy and brainpower so you can focus on the present moment.
The next time you RSVP for an event, in your next breath remind yourself to
plan. On an index card, list who is going to be at the event and list any talking
points or to do’s. Don’t be shy—carry the list with you!
Now let’s replay the former party scenario, but this time with your plan on
paper and in tow. After you arrive, you give the host that promised loaf of bread.
Check. You spot Jack in the kitchen, and move toward him to fit in a quick chat
and request that business card. Check. With that done, you notice that Kate is off
—she looks somber. You notice right away, not as an afterthought while you
drive home. You immediately address the alarm in your brain and pull Kate aside
to see if she needs to talk. She appreciates your concern, smiles, and shares her
story. With that, you both return to the group and enjoy the meal in front of you.
A bit of planning will not just prepare you for the event; planning will also
help you enjoy the event more because you’ll be less stressed and more present
while you’re there.
7 Clear Away the Clutter
To be socially aware, you must be socially present and remove distractions—
especially the ones inside your head. These internal distractions are much like
clutter in your garage or closet—there’s useful stuff in there, but it’s crowded
and hard to get to what you need. The solution: clear away the clutter.
There are a few culprits that are worthy of spring cleaning. First, we all have
conversations and chatter going on inside our heads; we talk to ourselves
constantly. We’re so busy having these internal chats that we tune the outside
world out—which is counterproductive to social awareness. The second culprit
is a process where we form our responses while the person we’re talking with is
still in fact talking. This, too, is counterproductive—it’s tough to listen to
yourself and the other person fully.
To clean up this internal clutter, there are some simple steps to follow. When
you are in a conversation, don’t interrupt the other person until he or she is
completely finished. Next, to squelch the voice that is planning your response,
it’s important to catch yourself in the act; and when you do, stop yourself and
clear away the clutter. Now refocus yourself on the person’s face and words. If
you need to, physically lean toward the speaker to focus your body into the
conversation. This awareness proves you’re making progress because, at one
time, you didn’t realize this pattern existed.
Remind yourself that you are in the conversation to listen and learn
something, not to wow the other person with your insightful remarks. As you
continue to be aware of your clutter and clear it, you’ll become better at quieting
your inner thoughts, and your listening skills will sharpen.
8 Live in the Moment
There’s no one better at living in the moment than a child. A child does not think
about what happened yesterday or what he’s going to do later today. In the
moment, he is Superman, and while he is fighting the bad guys, nothing else in
the world exists.
Adults, on the other hand, worry about the past (Oh, I should not have done
that) and stress about the future (How am I going to handle this tomorrow?). It’s
impossible to focus on the present while the future and the past loom. Social
awareness requires that you live in the moment as naturally as a child does, so
you can notice what’s happening with others right now.
Make being in the present moment a habit; it will only lift your social
awareness skills. Starting this month, if you are at the gym, then be at the gym. If
you are at a meeting, be at the meeting. Wherever you are, be as present as
possible so that you see the people around you and experience life in the
moment. If you catch yourself being somewhere else mentally, snap back to the
present. Remember, planning the future and reflecting on the past are valuable
exercises, but doing this throughout your day interferes with what is in front of
you—your present.
Remember, planning the future and reflecting on the past are valuable
exercises, but doing this throughout your day interferes with what is in
front of you—your present.
9 Go on a 15-minute Tour
Didn’t someone say that life is about the journey, not the destination? To become
socially aware, we need to remember to enjoy the journey and notice people
along the way. When you are focused only on getting to the next meeting,
starting your next class period, seeing the next patient, making it to all your
client sites, or hurrying to send an email, you’re missing all of the people
between Points A and B.
To commit some time to the journey, take some time to walk around where
you work and notice your surroundings. Going on a short tour will help you get
in tune with other people and their emotions, and refocus your attention on some
of the smaller yet critical social clues that exist right under your nose.
During any workday, take just 15 minutes to observe things you’ve never
noticed before. Things to look for include the look and feel of people’s
workspaces, the timing of when different people move around the office, and
which people seek interaction versus those who stay at their desks all day.
After your first observation tour, select a different day to tour your
workspace for moods. Other people’s moods can provide you with critical hints
about how things are going both individually and collectively. Notice what
people may be feeling or how they make you feel when you drop by to talk
briefly. Also observe the overall mood in the office or the school, patient care
area, manufacturing floor—whatever your work area looks like. Focus intently
on what you see, hear, and pick up on in other people.
Schedule 15 minutes to tour your workplace twice a week for a month. On
the days you tour, be sure to avoid making too many assumptions or conclusions
—just simply observe. You’ll be amazed at what you see along the way.
10 Watch EQ at the Movies
Hollywood. It’s the entertainment capital of the world known for glitz, glamour,
and celebrity. Believe it or not, Hollywood is also a hotbed of EQ, ripe for
building your social awareness skills.
After all, art imitates life, right? Movies are an abundant source of EQ skills
in action, demonstrating behaviors to emulate or completely avoid. Great actors
are masters at evoking real emotion in themselves; as their characters are
scripted to do outrageous and obvious things, it’s easy to observe the cues and
emotions on-screen.
To build social awareness skills, you need to practice being aware of what’s
happening with other people; it doesn’t matter if you practice using a box office
hero or a real person. When you watch a movie to observe social cues, you’re
practicing social awareness. Plus, since you are not living the situation, you’re
not emotionally involved, and the distractions are limited. You can use your
mental energy to observe the characters instead of dealing with your own life.
This month, make it a point to watch two movies specifically to observe the
character interactions, relationships, and conflicts. Look for body language clues
to figure out how each character is feeling and observe how the characters
handle the conflicts. As more information about the characters unfold, rewind
and watch past moments to spot clues you may have missed the first time.
Believe it or not, watching movies from the land of make-believe is one of the
most useful and entertaining ways to practice your social awareness skills for the
real world.
11 Practice the Art of Listening
This sounds basic, almost too basic to mention, but listening is a strategy and a
skill that is losing ground in society. Most people think they are good listeners,
but if adults played “the Telephone Game” today, how accurate would the final
message be? Listening requires focus, and focus isn’t easy because we’re
stretched in several directions.
Listening isn’t just about hearing words; it’s also about listening to the tone,
speed, and volume of the voice. What is being said? Anything not being said?
What hidden messages exist below the surface? You may have sat through a
speech or presentation where powerful words were chosen, but the tone, speed,
or volume didn’t match the power of the words. Instead, these likely matched the
speaker’s frame of mind.
Here’s the strategy to practice: when someone is talking to you, stop
everything else and listen fully until the other person is finished speaking. When
you are on a phone call, don’t type an email. When your son asks you a question,
put your laptop down and look at him while you respond. When you’re eating
dinner with your family, turn off the TV and listen to the conversation around the
table. When you’re meeting with someone, close the door and sit near the person
so you can focus and listen. Simple things like these will help you stay in the
present moment, pick up on the cues the other person sends, and really hear what
he or she is saying.
12 Go People Watching
Sometimes all you want to do is just sit back and watch the world go by—or, in
this case, people. Sit back at a table at your local coffee shop and just observe all
the people going in and out with their grande, non-fat, extra-hot lattes or the
couples walking hand-in-hand on the street: you are actually engaging in one of
the most effective social awareness strategies yet.
When you take the time to observe, you will notice people reveal their
moods. Watch how people interact with each other in the line at the local coffee
shop, grocery store, or other public places: these are great practice arenas. You
will see people looking at shelves in stores, and the pace at which they move.
You can keep a safe distance and use this as a trial run in spotting the body
language or nonverbal cues to tip you off to what people are feeling or thinking.
People watching is a safe way for you to pick up on signals, observe
interactions, and figure out underlying motivations or emotions without entering
into the interaction yourself. Being able to identify moods and emotions of
others is a huge part of social awareness, and often, these are things that fly
under your radar. So, in the next week, head out to your local coffee shop, grab a
beverage that strikes your fancy, and get comfortable—because it’s the perfect
place to work on social awareness.
13 Understand the Rules of the
Culture Game
Social awareness extends beyond just picking up on another person’s emotional
cues. Let’s say you start a new job at a company. To be successful, you will need
to learn how things are done in this company’s culture. You are assigned to share
an office with Lac Su. To be successful with Lac, you’ll also need to learn how
Lac’s cultural and family background influences his expectations of you as an
office mate. You can’t interpret his actions or reactions until you learn Lac’s
rules of the game.
Rules? Much of doing and saying the right things in social situations comes
from understanding the rules of the culture game. Our world is a melting pot of
vastly different cultures. These cultures interact, live, and conduct business with
each other according to very specific rules. There is no way around it, and it is a
requirement to learn how to become emotionally intelligent across cultures.
The secret to winning this culture game is to treat others how they want to be
treated, not how you would want to be treated. The trick is identifying the
different rules for each culture. To make matters even more complicated, the
rules you should be watching for and mastering include the rules not only of
ethnic culture but also of family and business culture.
How do you go about mastering multiple sets of rules at once? The first step
is to listen and watch even more and for a longer period of time than you would
with people from your own culture. Collect multiple observations and think
before you jump to conclusions. Consider yourself new in town, and before you
open your mouth and insert your foot, observe other people’s interactions. Look
for similarities and differences between how you would play the game versus
how others are playing it.
Next, ask specific questions. This may require talking in settings outside
meetings or on the sidelines. Many cultures, both business and ethnic, value
social interaction around meals before getting down to business. There is
wisdom in this approach because social interaction raises social awareness for
both parties and prepares them for playing by the rules of the game.
14 Test for Accuracy
Even the most socially aware people have off-days or situations they can’t quite
read. Maybe there’s so much interference and activity with people or the room
that it’s difficult to get a good reading in the midst of the hectic pace. Or perhaps
these socially aware people are almost sure they know what’s going on but need
some validation of their observations. In these cases, there’s a social awareness
strategy to get the answers you need: just ask.
Just ask? Remember, there’s no such thing as a silly question. Whether
you’re a novice or an expert in social awareness, we all need to confirm social
observations at some point. The best way to test your accuracy is to simply ask if
what you’re observing in people or situations is actually what’s occurring.
Maybe you have run into Steve at work and noticed that he has a sullen look
on his face with his head hanging low and his eyes never looking up from the
ground. You ask how he is doing, and he says he is doing “just fine.”
Your evidence is telling you otherwise—he says he’s fine, but he doesn’t
appear to be fine. In this moment, ask a reflective question to clarify what you
are seeing. Say something like, “It looks like you are feeling down about
something. Did something happen?” Simply stating what evidence you see (it
looks like you are feeling down) and asking a direct question (did something
happen?) is a reflective statement at its best. You will likely hear whatever he
wants you to know for now; but you’ve reached out to Steve and let him know
that you are interested.
Another type of question that tests for accuracy focuses on unspoken
messages—or what wasn’t necessarily said. Since people don’t always openly
and directly say how they feel about something, they’ll drop hints. If you feel
comfortable asking, this is a great opportunity to see if you picked up on the
hints and what you think they meant. You will also have the opportunity to catch
your mistakes if you’ve jumped to conclusions or missed a cue.
Testing your observations for accuracy will ultimately give you a keener
understanding of social situations, and help you pick up on cues that usually fly
under the radar. If you don’t ask, you’ll never be sure.
15 Step into Their Shoes
Actors do this all the time—they walk in characters’ shoes for a living. Actors
channel the same emotions and feelings, embodying the minds and motivations
of the characters. It’s how actors with great, healthy upbringings are able to play
the most convincing, dysfunctional characters—and vice versa. After actors’
work is complete, instead of complaining about the process, they often report
that they come to appreciate the characters they inhabit—even if it’s the bad guy.
Walking in the shoes of another is social awareness at its best—and it’s not
just for actors. It’s for all of us who want to gain perspective and a deeper
understanding of others, improve our communication, and identify problems
before they escalate. If you don’t think you need this, when was the last time you
thought, I wish I had known that Jane felt that way. If you’re wishing, it’s
already too late; wouldn’t it be more useful to catch Jane sooner in the situation?
To practice this strategy, you need to ask yourself questions that start with,
“If I were this person . . .” Let’s say you’re in a meeting and someone puts Jim
on the spot, questioning decisions he made on a project that had issues. If you
were the one who had to answer the question, your tendencies would put you on
the defensive. But, remember, this isn’t about you—it’s now about Jim. Put away
your own beliefs, emotions, thinking patterns, and tendencies—it’s about
experiencing this situation as Jim. Ask yourself, If I were Jim, how would I
respond to this question? To answer this, use your previous history with Jim to
help you understand him: how he’s reacted in similar situations in the past, how
he deals with being put on the spot, how he handles himself in groups and oneon-
one. How did he act, and what did he say? This is all critical information.
How do you know if you’re on target? If you’re comfortable with Jim and
the timing is right, approach him after the meeting and test your thoughts. If
you’re not comfortable with Jim, practice using another situation with someone
else and test your thoughts. The more you practice and get feedback, the more
comfortable you’ll become in the shoes of others.
16 Seek the Whole Picture
Since we see ourselves through our own rose-colored glasses, chances are we’re
seeing only part of the picture. If you had the opportunity, would you be willing
to see yourself through the eyes of those who know you best? Looking outward
and seeking this feedback are key to social awareness, because this gives us the
chance to see how others view us—to see the whole picture.
Taking advantage of this opportunity requires courage and strength to invite
your fans, as well as your critics, to get down to the nitty-gritty and honestly
share their perceptions of you. What if they’re wrong? What if they’re harsh?
What if they’re right?
Regardless of the answers, their perceptions matter because others’ opinions
of you influence you and your life. For example, if people think you are passive
in meetings when you simply need time to think before speaking, their
perceptions begin to shape what opportunities are offered to you. Soon your boss
is passing you over for chairing a committee because you are perceived as
passive instead of thoughtful.
The best method for seeing how others perceive you is simple and powerful.
For matters of EQ, you can send a 360-degree survey that asks you and other
people questions about your self-awareness, self-management, social awareness,
and relationship management skills. The result is a complete picture of your own
and others’ perceptions. Believe it or not, what others say about you is usually
more accurate than what you think about yourself. Nonetheless, whatever these
perceptions are, becoming aware is important so you know how they will shape
you.
Muster some of that strength and gather other people to help you out in
understanding yourself a bit more through their eyes. Other than becoming a fly
on the wall or videotaping yourself, this is what it takes to see yourself in action
through the eyes of others.
17 Catch the Mood of the Room
Once you’ve mastered reading the cues and emotions of other people, you’re
ready to read an entire room. It may sound daunting, but it’s what you’ve already
learned about social awareness—just on a larger scale.
Essentially, there are two ways to pick up the mood of an entire room. First,
you can rely solely on your gut instincts. Emotions are contagious, meaning they
spread from one or two people until there’s a palpable and collective mood that
you will feel at some level. For example, imagine walking into a room of 125
entrepreneurs who are networking and sharing their ideas. It’s pretty likely that
there would be excitement and positive energy there, and it wouldn’t take long to
become aware of it. You’d hear their voice levels and tones, and see the focused
and interested posture and body language. Now imagine walking into a room of
125 people waiting to be chosen for jury duty. The room is quiet; people are
trying to distract themselves with reading material, music, and anything else to
pass the time. Even though it’s our civic duty to attend, hardly anyone wants to
be there. The two moods are like night and day.
Emotions are contagious, meaning they spread from one or two people
until there’s a palpable and collective mood that you will feel at some
level.
Here’s how you can catch the mood of the room. When you enter the room,
scan it and notice whether you feel and see energy or quiet, subdued calm. Take
notice of how people are arranging themselves—alone or in groups. Are they
talking and moving their hands? Are some more animated than others? What is
your gut telling you about them?
Another way to read the mood of the room is to bring along a more
experienced guide, much like you would on an African safari. Your guide should
be a socially aware expert willing to show you the ropes when it comes to
tapping into your instincts and picking up the room’s mood. Shadow your guide
and listen to what he feels and sees. Ask what he senses and what clues gave the
mood away. Eventually, you should be the one to take the lead. Size up the room
and share and compare your thoughts with your guide. Through this exercise,
you will soon pick up on observations like your guide does, in time doing so on
your own.
Human nature and behavior may not be that far from what happens on the
open African savannah. The sooner you can hone your ability to spot safety,
concern, or shifts in moods in group settings, the more skilled you will be in
maneuvering through the social wilds of your life.
M
8
RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES
ost people have a spring in their step and put their best foot forward when
they are in a new relationship (work or otherwise), but they stumble and
lose their footing trying to maintain relationships over the long term. Reality
soon sets in that the honeymoon phase is officially over.
The truth is, all relationships take work, even the great ones that seem
effortless. We’ve all heard this, but do we really get it?
Working on a relationship takes time, effort, and know-how. The know-how
is emotional intelligence. If you want a relationship that has staying power and
grows over time, and in which your needs and the other person’s needs are
satisfied, the final EQ skill—relationship management—is just what the doctor
ordered.
Thankfully, these relationship management skills can be learned, and they
tap into the three other EQ skills that you’re familiar with—self-awareness, selfmanagement,
and social awareness. You use your self-awareness skills to notice
your feelings and judge if your needs are being satisfied. You use your selfmanagement
skills to express your feelings and act accordingly to benefit the
connection. Finally, you use your social awareness skills to better understand the
other person’s needs and feelings.
In the end, no man is an island; relationships are an essential and fulfilling
part of life. Since you are half of any relationship, you have half of the
responsibility of deepening these connections. The following 17 strategies will
help you work on what’s critical to making relationships work.
RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES
1. Be Open and Be Curious
2. Enhance Your Natural Communication Style
3. Avoid Giving Mixed Signals
4. Remember the Little Things That Pack a Punch
5. Take Feedback Well
6. Build Trust
7. Have an “Open-door” Policy
8. Only Get Mad on Purpose
9. Don’t Avoid the Inevitable
10. Acknowledge the Other Person’s Feelings
11. Complement the Person’s Emotions or Situation
12. When You Care, Show It
13. Explain Your Decisions, Don’t Just Make Them
14. Make Your Feedback Direct and Constructive
15. Align Your Intention with Your Impact
16. Offer a “Fix-it” Statement during a Broken Conversation
17. Tackle a Tough Conversation
1 Be Open and Be Curious
We can imagine a few readers thinking, “Oh brother, I have to be open and
curious with people at work? Can I just work on my projects and what I was
hired to do, minus the touchy-feely stuff?” Actually, establishing, building, and
maintaining relationships are all part of your job—even if you work with just
one other person. Maintaining relationships may not be on your job description
and may not have even been discussed, but for you to be successful, being open
and curious is absolutely, unequivocally part of your job.
Let’s explore what “open” means in terms of relationship management.
Being open means sharing information about yourself with others. You can use
your self-management skills to choose how open you are and what you share,
but know that there’s a benefit to opening up that may help you with your
choices: when people know about you, there’s less room for them to misinterpret
you. For example, if you are particularly sensitive about showing up five
minutes early to meetings, and get annoyed when people stroll in at the very
beginning of the meeting or even a little late, some people might interpret you as
being uptight and rigid. If you shared with these same people that you were in
the Marines for the first years of your career, your coworkers would understand
and maybe even appreciate your sense of timing and courtesy. Who knows, your
punctuality might even rub off!
Being an open book on your end isn’t the whole story with managing a
relationship—you also need to be interested in the other person’s story as well.
In other words, you need to be curious. The more you show interest in and learn
about the other person, the better shot you have at meeting his or her needs and
not misinterpreting them.
When you ask questions, draw from your social awareness skills to choose
an appropriate setting and time. Be inquisitive in your tone—similar to how
Santa Claus asks a child what he’d like for Christmas. The opposite tone is
judgmental—think of someone who’s ever asked you a question like, “Why on
earth did you buy a motorcycle?” or “You majored in philosophy? What did you
plan to do with THAT?”
When you ask questions and this person opens up, you will not only learn
information that will help you manage the relationship, but the other person will
also appreciate the interest shown in him or her. If you are beginning a new
relationship, in an established one, or even if you’re in a rough patch, take a few
minutes out of your day to identify a few relationships that need some attention,
and make time to be open and curious with these people.
2 Enhance Your Natural
Communication Style
Whether it’s putting your two cents in when others are talking to you or shying
away from a disagreement, your natural communication style shapes your
relationships. Now you have the opportunity to use your self-awareness, selfmanagement,
and social awareness skills to shape your natural style.
At the top of a page in a journal, describe what your natural style is. You can
call it whatever you would like. Think about how your friends, family, and
colleagues experience your style. Is it direct, indirect, comfortable, serious,
entertaining, discreet, controlled, chatty, intense, curious, cool, intrusive? You
name it because you’ve likely heard about it more than once.
On the left side of the paper, jot down the upsides of your natural style.
These are the things people appreciate about how you interact with them. On the
right side, list the downsides or things that have created confusion, weird
reactions, or trouble.
Once your list is complete, choose three upsides that you can use more to
improve your communication. Next, choose three downsides, and think about
ways you can either eliminate, downplay, or improve them. Be honest with
yourself about what you will or won’t do. If you need help figuring out what will
give you the biggest results, just ask your friends, coworkers, and family for
their suggestions. Making your plan public will also build in accountability that
can help you make a lasting improvement in your relationships.
3 Avoid Giving Mixed Signals
We all rely on stoplights to safely direct us through intersections dozens of times
each week. When the stoplights aren’t working, and the lights either blink to
proceed with caution or are out altogether, the intersection transforms into an
every-man-for-himself situation. People are confused; and when it’s their turn to
cross, they gingerly look all ways before moving ahead. With functioning
stoplights, we have confidence in the system because it’s clear what we do—stop
on red, and go on green. It’s the same for signals that we send to the people in
our relationships.
Feelings express truth, and they have a way of rising to the surface through
our reactions and body language, despite the words we choose. Telling your staff
in a muted voice and frowning face that they did a great job on the product
launch doesn’t match up; the words and the body language are mixed. People
trust what they see over what they hear.
Even if you’re a good self-manager, your emotions rise to the surface. You
experience many emotions every day, and your brain can’t sort through every
single one. When you talk with someone, you may be saying one thing that’s on
your mind as your body reacts to an emotion you experienced minutes ago.
You confuse and frustrate others when you say one thing and your body or
tone say another. Over time, this confusion will cause communication issues that
will affect your relationships. To resolve the mixed signal issue, use your selfawareness
skills to identify your emotions, and use your self-management skills
to decide which feelings to express and how to express them.
People trust what they see over what they hear.
Sometimes it might not be appropriate to match your signals. Let’s say you
become angry in a meeting and can’t really show your emotion at that moment.
Just put your anger on the back burner for the moment, but don’t disregard the
feeling forever. Choose a time when you can express your anger: when it doesn’t
work against you but instead produces the most positive results. If your emotion
is strong enough and you can’t put off expressing it, your best bet is to explain
what’s happening (i.e., “If I seem distracted, it’s because I can’t stop worrying
about a phone call that went awry this morning”).
For the next month, pay close attention to matching your tone and body
language to what you are really trying to say. Take mental note of those moments
when you tell someone that you are feeling fine, but your body, tone, or
demeanor is sending drastically different signals. When you catch yourself
sending a mixed signal, readjust to match it or explain it.
4 Remember the Little Things That Pack a Punch
It’s pretty obvious on any news channel, reality show, sitcom, or newspaper that
today’s media feed off the idea that courtesy appears to be diminishing in
modern society. With the decline of good manners, there are fewer expressions
of appreciation. These days, in both personal and work-related relationships,
there are far too few “please’s,” “thank you’s,” and “I’m sorry’s” being
expressed.
Most workers will say that they never get thanked for their contributions at
work but yet will agree that hearing “thank you,” “please,” or even “I’m sorry”
can have a positive impact on morale.
Think about how often you really say “thank you,” “please,” or “I’m sorry”
when it is needed; if you don’t use them often, it could be due to lack of time or
habit, or maybe even a bruised ego. Begin to make a habit of incorporating more
of these phrases into your relationships. Or, rather, please make it a habit to use
more of these phrases during your day. Thank you.
5 Take Feedback Well
Feedback is a unique gift. It’s meant to help us improve in ways that we perhaps
cannot see on our own. Since you never know exactly what you are going to
receive, however, feedback is sometimes like opening up a present and looking
inside to find a pair of tiger-striped socks with red sequins.
The element of surprise can catch us off guard, so we need to use our selfawareness
skills to prepare ourselves for that moment. What do I feel when I am
on the spot and surprised? How do I show it? With that awareness, move on to
your self-management skills: what response should I choose?
To help you receive feedback well, let’s break it down. First, consider the
source of your feedback. This person probably has a relevant perspective—he or
she knows you and has seen your performance—and has an interest in seeing
you improve.
As you receive feedback, turn on your social awareness skills to listen and
really hear what is being said. Ask clarifying questions and ask for examples to
better understand the person’s perspective. Whether you agree with what was
said or not, thank the person for his or her willingness to share, because it takes
almost as much grace to give feedback as it does to receive it.
After you receive the feedback, use your self-management skills to decide
your next steps; don’t feel pressured to rush into action. Time can help you
absorb the underlying point, sort out your feelings and thoughts, and help you to
decide what to do about the feedback. Remember the Emotion vs. Reason list?
Receiving feedback is probably the hardest part of the process. Once you
decide what to do with the feedback, follow up with plans. Actually making
adjustments will show the person who gave you feedback that you value his or
her comments. Take the person’s feedback seriously and try what he or she
suggested. There may be no better way to solidify your relationship with him or
her.
6 Build Trust
Have you ever been asked to “practice” trust? The exercise looks like this: you
have a partner, and you stand about five feet in front of the person with your
back facing him. You close your eyes, and on a count of three, you fall backward
toward the person so that he can catch you. When you’re caught, everyone
enjoys a laugh and is thankful neither person wiped out. If only trust were a
matter of good, strong arms and steady balance.
An unknown author said, “Trust is a peculiar resource; it is built rather than
depleted by use.” Trust is something that takes time to build, can be lost in
seconds, and may be our most important and most difficult objective in
managing our relationships.
How is trust built? Open communication; willingness to share; consistency in
words, actions, and behavior over time; and reliability in following through on
the agreements of the relationship, just to name a few examples. It’s ironic that,
for most relationships, a certain level of trust needs to be present in order for you
to develop trust.
“Trust is a peculiar resource; it is built rather than depleted by use.”
To build trust, use your self-awareness and self-management skills to be the
first to lay some of yourself on the line and share something about you.
Remember, you should share parts of yourself at a time; don’t feel like you have
to be a complete open book up front.
To manage your relationships, you need to manage your trust of others, and
their trust level of you is critical to deepening your connection with others.
Cultivating relationships and building trust take time. Identify the relationships
in your life that need more trust, and use your self-awareness skills to ask
yourself what is missing. Use your social awareness skills to ask the other person
what needs to happen to build trust—and listen to the answer. Asking will show
you care about the relationship, which will help to build trust, and deepen the
relationship.
7 Have an “Open-door” Policy
Here’s a quick history lesson that you may remember: the Open Door policy
originated in 1899 when the United States feared it would lose its trading
privileges in the East. The United States declared an “open-door policy,”
allowing all trading nations access to the Chinese market.
Access: it’s an important word that sums up the open-door concept. Access
has moved swiftly beyond trading agreements and into the workplace. Today, a
true open-door policy allows any employee to talk to anyone at any level,
fostering upward communication through direct and easy access to everyone
below.
Ask those around you if you should adopt an open-door policy to better
manage your relationships. If you need to be more accessible and show people
they can have unscheduled, informal conversations with you, then adopting this
policy might be right up your alley.
Keep in mind you don’t have to stretch yourself too thin by being there for
everyone at anytime; you simply have to communicate your policy and then
stick to it. Use your self-awareness skills to identify how the policy works for
you, and manage yourself to make it work. Ongoing observations of others, also
known as social awareness, should help you determine how it’s working, too.
Remember, increasing your accessibility can only improve your relationships
—it literally opens the door to communication, even if it’s virtual (by email or
phone). People will feel valued and respected because of the time you’re giving
them; and you get the opportunity to learn about others. At the end of the day,
the policy’s a win for you and a win for others.
8 Only Get Mad on Purpose
“Anyone can become angry—that is easy. But to be angry with the right person,
to the right degree, at the right time, for the right purpose, and in the right way,
this is not easy.”
We can thank Greek philosopher Aristotle for those words and enduring
insight into managing our emotions and relationships. If you can master this one,
consider your EQ journey a success. Anger is an emotion that exists for a reason
—anger is not an emotion to stifle or ignore. If you manage it properly and use it
purposefully, you can get results that enhance your relationships. Really.
Think of the football coach who gets straight to the point at halftime. His
stern feedback grabs his players’ attention and focuses them for the second half.
The team returns refreshed, refocused, and ready to win; in this case, the coach
managed his emotions to motivate others to action. Expressing anger in
appropriate ways communicates your strong feelings and reminds people of the
gravity of a situation. Expressing anger too much or at the wrong times
desensitizes people to what you are feeling, making it hard for others to take you
seriously.
Using a strong emotion like anger to benefit your relationships will take time
to master, because hopefully you don’t have daily opportunities to practice.
There’s a lot of behind-the-scenes preparation for this strategy, starting with
becoming aware of your anger.
Use your self-awareness skills to think about and define your varying
degrees of anger—from what annoys you a little to what sends you off the deep
end. Write these down and choose words that are specific and then write
examples to explain when you feel this way. Determine when you should show
your anger based on the criterion that if it’s shared it will actually improve the
relationship somehow. To make your choices, use your social awareness skills to
think about the other people involved and their responses.
Remember, relationship management is about making choices and acting
with the goal of creating an honest, deep connection with others. To do this, you
need to be honest with others and with yourself, which sometimes means using
anger with a purpose.
9 Don’t Avoid the Inevitable
You and Marge work in the same shipping and receiving department. She gets
under your skin; if you could press a button to ship her to another department, it
would’ve been done five years ago. The problem is, no such button exists, and
there’s no chance of change. To add fuel to the fire, your boss has just given you
and Marge a large project to work on together. She suggests meeting for lunch to
talk about the next steps, and you generate a fast list of reasons why you can’t
make it. You have officially brushed Marge off. Now what? You’re still at square
one (that’s what), and you still have the project and have to figure out how to
work together.
This is when relationship management skills are absolutely necessary,
because though you might not choose a friendship with this person, you and
Marge are now responsible for the same project. Here’s a basic strategy to work
with Marge: do not avoid her or the situation. Accept it and make the choice to
use your EQ skills to move forward with her.
You’ll need to watch your emotions, and make decisions about how to
manage those emotions. Since you’re not in this alone, conjure up your social
awareness skills to bring Marge into the fold and put yourself in her shoes. Meet
with her to learn about what experience she has to offer and her preferences for
working with you on this project. Observe her body language to see how she
responds to you; maybe you frustrate her just as much! This may hurt a little, but
you may actually lay the groundwork for a working relationship.
Next, share your preferences for managing the project and come to an
agreement. You won’t need to tell Marge you don’t care for her—instead, you
can share that you’d prefer to work independently on separate parts of the
project and meet along the way to ensure you’re both on track. If Marge agrees,
your work process has been hammered out. If she doesn’t agree, it’s time to
apply more self-management and social awareness skills until you reach an
agreement.
If you get frustrated along the way (and chances are you will), ask yourself
why and decide how to manage yourself. Loop back with Marge at your next
meeting, and remind yourselves about the goal of the project. At the end of the
project, find a way to acknowledge what you both accomplished together.
10 Acknowledge the Other
Person’s Feelings
If you’re known for being terrible with relationships, then this EQ strategy may
be a great place to start getting better. Let’s say that, one morning, you’re pulling
into your company’s parking lot, and you see your coworker Jessie holding back
tears as she exits her car next to you. You ask her if she’s OK, and she’s not. You
respond with, “Well, work will get it off your mind. See you inside.” Then you
wonder why she avoids you for the rest of the day.
One key to managing relationships is leaning into your own discomfort and
taking a moment to acknowledge, not stifle or change, other people’s feelings.
“I’m sorry you’re upset; what can I do?” shows Jessie that if crying is what’s
going to help her, then you’d be willing to find her a tissue. Simple acts like this
one acknowledge emotions without making them a big deal, marginalizing them,
or dismissing them. Everyone has a right to experience feelings, even if you
might not feel the same way. You don’t have to agree with the way people are
feeling, but you do have to recognize those feelings as legitimate and respect
them.
To help you validate someone’s feelings, let’s use Jessie’s example. Using
your social awareness skills, listen to her intently and summarize what you’ve
heard back to her. Not only does it show great listening skills, but it also shows
that you’re adept at relationship management because you reached out to show
you cared, and took an interest in her. You’ll end up with a better connection
with a now-calm Jessie—and all it took was some time to pay attention and
notice her feelings.
11 Complement the Person’s Emotions or Situation
If you calmly phone your utility company to have an incorrect fee removed from
your monthly bill, you would assume that the customer service representative
would be helpful, friendly, and courteous with your request.
Let’s say you make the same phone call, but this time you’re in a terrible
mood. You’re feeling testy, agitated, and annoyed at the error. You’ve been on
hold for 10 minutes, which doesn’t help. When the customer service rep talks to
you, he can hear it in your voice. When he speaks, he sounds serious, as if he
wants to resolve this quickly. You appreciate the professionalism and service,
check this problem off your list, and move on. This customer service rep is
skilled at picking up on cues and adapting to them to give fast, hassle-free
service—which benefits the customer and the company as well. And his high EQ
makes him promotable and marketable.
What he did exactly is a strategy in relationship management that requires
social awareness skills—listening, being present, putting yourself in the shoes of
the other person, identifying where someone is emotionally, and choosing an
appropriate and complementary response. This last piece, choosing a
complementary response, doesn’t require you to match or mirror emotions; it
wouldn’t make sense for the customer service rep to use the same impatient
approach you did—that would infuriate you as the customer. Mirroring emotions
would also make coworkers and friends recoil. The complementary response
always says you recognize what the other person feels and you think it’s
important.
To practice complementing emotions in your relationships, think about one
or two emotional situations you’ve experienced where there wasn’t a lot of gray
area and there was at least one other person present. How did the other person
respond to you? Did his or her response help or hurt your mood? Was the person
able to complement your emotional state? Once you can answer these questions,
it’s your turn to focus on complementing other people’s emotions in the
situations they face. Give yourself a week or two to be at the ready for the
people in your closest relationships—the people at work or home. Tell yourself
your role is to notice their moods and to be there for your coworkers and family
members in a helpful way. Whether you are excited or concerned for them, you
will show that you are sensitive and care about what they are going through.
12 When You Care, Show It
Here’s a true story for aspiring high-EQ managers across the globe. One
morning, I groggily went up in the elevator of my office building to start yet
another day. It had been a long night the day before; I had stayed late so I could
finish some projects for my boss. When I got to my cubicle, I saw that there was
a fresh black-and-white cookie and a card that said, “Thanks for filling in the
black and whites.” It was from my boss. She was always such a busy person,
juggling home and work. I was floored to see that she had found a few minutes
to slip into a bakery on behalf of my sweet tooth, and get into the office early to
put a cookie on my chair. I just about cried at her thoughtfulness.
Talk about the simple things that go a long way. That cookie motivated me to
work even harder, and I did so happily and with fierce loyalty.
We hear this story in many forms, but the strategy is always the same. There
are people who do great work around you every day. When you care, show it.
Don’t hesitate or put it off until next week. Do something this week or even
today. Things as simple as a greeting card or something else inexpensive, yet
meaningful, that sums up how you feel are all you need to make an impact and
strengthen a relationship.
13 Explain Your Decisions, Don’t
Just Make Them
It’s frightening to be in a place you’re not familiar with and be completely in the
dark. Case in point—have you ever planned to go camping but got to the site in
the dark? It’s hard to get your bearings, you’re setting up a tent in the dark, and
because you’re in the wilderness, it’s just eerily quiet and black. You go to bed
with one eye open and hope for the best.
The next day, you wake up tired and unzip your tent, and you’re amazed at
the beauty around you: water, mountains, tree-lined trails, and cute little animals
abound. There’s nothing to be afraid of—you soon forget last night’s anxieties,
and you move about your day. What were you so worried about, anyway?
The only difference between these two scenarios is light—it’s the same
place, and you’re with the same people with the same gear. This is what people
experience when decisions are made for them. When you are in the dark,
intentionally or not, about upcoming layoffs, contract negotiations, and the like,
you may as well be setting up camp in blackness. If there are layoffs that
increase your workload or change your shift, you’ll find out when the pink slips
are handed out. If taxes are changed, you’ll see it on your paycheck. No
recourse, no trial period. It’s a done deal.
That’s a tough pill to swallow because we’re not children or dependents;
we’re adults. To support an idea, we need to understand why the decision was
made. When you use your EQ to manage relationships, keep this in mind. Instead
of making a change and expecting others to just accept it, take time to explain
the why behind the decision, including alternatives, and why the final choice
made the most sense. If you can ask for ideas and input ahead of time, it’s even
better. Finally, acknowledge how the decision will affect everyone. People
appreciate this transparency and openness, even though the decision may
negatively impact them. Transparency and openness also make people feel like
they are trusted, respected, and connected to their organization—instead of being
told what to do and kept in the dark.
If you have a habit of making decisions quickly and independently, you’re
likely very personally competent. Though old habits die hard, since they’re
ingrained in your brain’s wiring, it’s time to rewire and add social competence to
your decision-making repertoire.
First, you’ll likely have to spot your upcoming decisions. Take out your
calendar to look over the next three months to identify which decisions will need
to be made by then. Now work backward and see who will be impacted by these
decisions. Make a complete list of who will be affected by each decision and
plan on when and where you will talk together about each, including the details
that explain why and how each decision will be made. If you have to invite
people to a special meeting for just this purpose, so be it. As you plan your
agenda and your words, use your social awareness skills to put yourself in the
shoes of others, so you can speak to your audience before and after you make the
decision as they would expect and hope.
14 Make Your Feedback Direct and Constructive
Think about the best feedback you ever received. It wasn’t something you
necessarily wanted or expected, but it made a difference in your behavior going
forward. The feedback may have shaped your overall performance, or how you
deal with a particular situation, or even your career. What made the feedback so
good?
If you are responsible for giving feedback, there are several guidebooks to
walk you through the process, making sure it’s within legal and human resources
guidelines. Sit down, we have some news: following legal guidelines isn’t what
makes feedback a performance-or person-changing experience; infusing EQ
know-how into your feedback, though, is what does.
Here’s how to think about feedback and EQ—giving feedback is a
relationship-building event that requires all four EQ skills to be effective. Use
your self-awareness skills to identify your feelings about the feedback. Are you
comfortable with the process? Why or why not? Next, use your self-management
skills to decide what you’ll do with the information you just learned about
yourself from answering the above questions. For example, if you’re anxious
about giving feedback about phone etiquette because you don’t want people to
think you’re eavesdropping, how exactly are you going to get beyond this
anxiety to confidently give feedback? It’s up to you, but don’t ignore the
feedback because of your discomfort.
Giving feedback is a relationship-building event that requires all four EQ
skills to be effective.
Next, use your social awareness skills to think of the person who’s receiving
the feedback. Remember, feedback is meant to address the problem, not the
person. How does the person need to hear your message so it’s clear, direct,
constructive, and respectful? Constructive feedback has two parts: sharing your
opinion and offering solutions for change. Let’s take Todd: he’s very direct—
sugarcoating his need to make phone etiquette improvements will insult him. But
if sugarcoating hard news is in his improvement plan, consider sharing feedback
with and without the sugar so he can hear the difference and learn from it.
Jenni, on the other hand, is sensitive. Since this is a relationship-building
experience, keep Jenni in mind when planning her feedback. Using softeners
such as “I think,” or “I believe,” or “This time” to begin a statement may soften
the blow. Instead of “Your report is terrible,” use “I believe there are parts of
your report that could use revisions. May I walk you through some
suggestions?” Here, offering suggestions for improvement is helpful—not
prescriptive. At the end, ask the person for his or her thoughts, and thank the
person for his or her willingness to consider your suggestions.
15 Align Your Intention with Your Impact
Let’s say you’re in a staff meeting and the next topic on the agenda is to figure
out why some key deadlines are being missed. After some back-and-forth, it’s
looking like Ana might be partially to blame—and the room is getting tense. In
an honest attempt to lighten the mood, you say something like, “Geez, Ana—
looks like maybe taking those longer lunches is finally catching up to you!”
Instead of laughs, there’s dead silence. You don’t understand what you did
wrong, and you later tell Ana, “I was only kidding,” but she seems put off. These
are the famous last words of someone who had good intentions, but the result, or
impact, was not aligned. And it’s too late.
Or think about the results-driven manager who has good intentions about
guiding her staff toward achieving higher goals. She’s so focused on success that
she becomes entrenched in the work (doing most of it herself or pushing
everyone to do it her way)—completely missing how to manage the work
through others. Her staff deems her a hard-driving micromanager who doesn’t
share knowledge, and all she intended was for the team to learn from her and be
successful. Yet again, intentions were good, but they had the opposite impact.
Relationships are now tarnished, and the manager can’t figure out why her staff
resents her.
If you find that you spend time smoothing things over to repair a
relationship, or you are unsure about what’s going wrong in your relationships,
know that these situations are avoidable. With the help of your awareness and
management skills, making small adjustments will make all the difference.
To align your words and actions with your intent, you need to use your social
awareness and self-management skills to observe the situation and the people in
it, think before you speak or act, and make an appropriate and sensitive response.
Do a quick analysis. Think of a situation where the impact of what you said or
did was not what you intended. On a piece of paper, describe the incident, your
intentions, your actions, and the impact—the end result or reaction of others.
Next, write what you didn’t realize in the situation—and fill in what you
understand now in hindsight, including missed cues, what you learned about
yourself, and others. Finally, answer what you could have done differently to
keep your intent and impact aligned. If you’re not sure, ask someone who was
involved in the situation.
In Ana’s case, you didn’t realize it was the wrong moment for that joke. It
singled her out publicly. Next time, you’ll lighten the mood by poking fun at
yourself, not someone else. The results-driven manager didn’t realize what
motivated her staff members. She didn’t give them space and time to learn and
grow on their own. To better manage your relationships, it’s critical to spot
misalignments before you act, so that your actions match your impact with your
good intentions.
16 Offer a “Fix-it” Statement during
a Broken Conversation
Airline agents. They are often the bearer of unavoidably bad news in person—
weather delays, delays due to mechanical repairs, lost luggage, overbooking. The
list goes on and on. Airline agents attempt to repair your broken experience with
fix-its or tools—like rebooking and vouchers—to problem solve and address the
ultimate goal to get you to your destination.
It’s probably safe to assume that we’ve all had conversations where we could
use a fix-it. A simple discussion breaks into a disagreement or gets stuck going
around in circles. In these broken conversations, past mistakes may get brought
to the surface, regretful comments are made, and blame is present. No matter
who said what, or who “started it,” it’s time to refocus and fix it. Someone needs
to step back, quickly assess the situation, and begin repairing the conversation
with a fix-it.
To do this, you need to let go of blame and focus on the repair. Do you want
to be right, or do you want a resolution? Use your self-awareness skills to see
what you are contributing to the situation; self-manage to put your tendencies
aside and choose the high road. Your social awareness skills can help you
identify what the other person brought to the table or feels. Looking at both sides
will help you figure out where the interaction broke down, and which “fix-it”
statement is needed to begin the repairs. Fix-it statements feel like a breath of
fresh air, are neutral in tone, and find common ground. A “fix-it” statement can
be as simple as saying, “This is hard,” or asking how the person is feeling. Most
conversations can benefit from a fix-it, and it won’t do any harm if you feel the
conversation breaking down.
Fix-it statements feel like a breath of fresh air, are neutral in tone, and
find common ground.
This strategy will help you maintain open lines of communication when
you’re upset, and with conscious effort and practice, you will be able to fix your
broken conversations before they become damaged beyond repair.
17 Tackle a Tough Conversation
“Why did I get passed over for the promotion?” your staff member Judith asks
with a slightly defensive tone, a wounded posture, and a quivering voice. This is
going to be a tough one. The news leaked out early about Roger’s promotion
before you could speak with Judith. You value Judith and her work, but you’ll
need to explain that she’s not ready for the next level yet. That’s not the hardest
part of this conversation—damage control is another story.
From the boardroom to the break room, tough conversations will surface,
and it is possible to calmly and effectively handle them. Tough conversations are
inevitable; forget running from them because they’re sure to catch up to you.
Though EQ skills can’t make these conversations disappear, acquiring some new
skills can make these conversations a lot easier to navigate without ruining the
relationship.
1. Start with agreement. If you know you are likely to end up in a
disagreement, start your discussion with the common ground you share.
Whether it’s simply agreeing that the discussion will be hard but important or
agreeing on a shared goal, create a feeling of agreement. For example:
“Judith, I first want you to know that I value you, and I’m sorry that you
learned the news from someone other than me. I’d like to use this time to
explain the situation, and anything else you’d like to hear from me. I’d also
like to hear from you.”
2. Ask the person to help you understand his or her side. People want to be
heard—if they don’t feel heard, frustration rises. Before frustration enters the
picture, beat it to the punch and ask the person to share his or her point of
view. Manage your own feelings as needed, but focus on understanding the
other person’s view. In Judith’s case, this would sound like, “Judith, along
the way I want to make sure you feel comfortable sharing what’s on your
mind with me. I’d like to make sure I understand your perspective.” By
asking for Judith’s input, you are showing that you care and have an interest
in learning more about her. This is an opportunity to deepen and manage
your relationship with Judith.
3. Resist the urge to plan a “comeback” or a rebuttal. Your brain cannot
listen well and prepare to speak at the same time. Use your self-management
skills to silence your inner voice and direct your attention to the person in
front of you. In this case, Judith has been passed up for a promotion that she
was really interested in, and found out about it through the grapevine. Let’s
face it—if you’d like to maintain the relationship, you need to be quiet, listen
to her shock and disappointment, and resist the urge to defend yourself.
4. Help the other person understand your side, too. Now it is your turn to
help the other person understand your perspective. Describe your discomfort,
your thoughts, your ideas, and the reasons behind your thought process.
Communicate clearly and simply; don’t speak in circles or in code. In
Judith’s case, what you say can ultimately be great feedback for her, which
she deserves. To explain that Roger had more experience and was more
suited for the job at this time is an appropriate message. Since his promotion
was leaked to her in an unsavory way, this is something that requires an
apology. This ability to explain your thoughts and directly address others in a
compassionate way during a difficult situation is a key aspect of relationship
management.
5. Move the conversation forward. Once you understand each other’s
perspective, even if there’s disagreement, someone has to move things along.
In the case of Judith, it’s you. Try to find some common ground again. When
you’re talking to Judith, say something like, “Well, I’m so glad you came to
me directly and that we had the opportunity to talk about it. I understand
your position, and it sounds like you understand mine. I’m still invested in
your development and would like to work with you on getting the experience
you need. What are your thoughts?”
6. Keep in touch. The resolution to a tough conversation needs more attention
even after you leave it, so check progress frequently, ask the other person if
he or she is satisfied, and keep in touch as you move forward. You are half of
what it takes to keep a relationship oiled and running smoothly. In regard to
Judith, meeting with her regularly to talk about her career advancement and
promotion potential would continue to show her that you care about her
progress.
In the end, when you enter a tough conversation, prepare yourself to take the
high road, not be defensive, and remain open by practicing the strategies above.
Instead of losing ground with someone in a conversation like this, it can actually
become a moment that solidifies your relationship going forward.
The Nature of Stress
Life is either a daring adventure
or nothing at all.
– Helen Keller
Part 1
Coping Strategies
There is no such thing as a
problem without a gift for you
in its hands. You seek problems
because you need their gifts.
—Richard Bach Part 3
When we encounter a situation or event
we perceive as a stressor, some part of
us feels very vulnerable and threatened.
To survive the threat, whether
minimal or colossal, some type of coping strategy is created
to deal with it. Each stressor necessitates its own
coping strategy. Some coping strategies are second nature
to most people when the stressor is minimal, and
a course of action is taken with little or no conscious
thought involved. But as the number and intensity of
stressors increases and a critical mass of tension manifests,
then routine coping strategies may fail to do an
effective job. The result can be feelings of immobilization,
mental paralysis, and emotional fatigue until
a more effective coping technique, or combination of
techniques, is employed. For the most part, the expression
coping responses, unlike defense mechanisms, has a
positive connotation, suggesting that a positive outcome
is likely. However, this is not always the case, as some
coping behaviors perpetuate stress rather than promote
inner peace.
The word coping, as defi ned by stress scholar Richard
Lazarus (1981), is “the process of managing demands that
are appraised as taxing or exceeding the individual’s
resources.” He went on to add that coping consists of both
cognitive and action-oriented (behavioral) efforts.
According to Lazarus, this managing process involves
several important criteria, including some or all of the
following: an increased awareness process of oneself, the
situation, and the environment; an emotional regulation
process he referred to as palliative coping; and quite
often, a series of behavioral changes, referred to as instrumental
coping, which accompany this awareness and
cognitive pro cess. Lazarus also believed that coping isn’t
the employment of several techniques so much as it is a
specifi c frame of mind. Part of this mind frame is a personality
trait, self-effi cacy, a term coined by psychologist
Albert Bandura to describe an inner sense of faith culminating
in a “can-do” attitude. Self-effi cacy describes
access to several inner resources including self-confi -
dence, faith, will power, and self-reliance. The possession
and implementation of this trait tend to divide those who
choose effective coping strategies from those who elect
non effective ones. In other words, your dominant coping
style may be a function of your personality.
To date, the best and most comprehensive conceptual
model to understand the coping process is that created by
Lazarus and colleagues. According to Lazarus, every
stressor undergoes primary appraisal to determine the
extent of damage. It is then reprocessed in a secondary
appraisal. At this point, a series of coping responses are
lined up with the stressor to see which is the best course of
action. These coping responses fall into one of two categories:
action-oriented, such as time management or assertive
behavior, or intrapsychic (acceptance). The responses
used to cope with stress can be derived internally (from
inner resources) and/or externally. Inner resources include,
among other things, willpower, sense of humor, creativity,
sense of reason, self-effi cacy, faith, and optimism.
External resources would include time, money, and social
support from friends and family. Lazarus cites the purposes
of coping skills as the following:
1. To reduce harmful environmental conditions
2. To tolerate or adjust to negative events or realities
3. To maintain a positive self-image
4. To maintain emotional equilibrium
5. To continue satisfying relationships with others
Coping responses can elicit three outcomes: (1) to regain
the emotional status quo, (2) to resume normal activities
interrupted by the stressor, or (3) to feel psychologically
overwhelmed.
Other researchers have noted a dichotomy of coping
styles: avoidance versus confrontation (Holahan and
Moos, 1987) and combative versus preventive (Matheny
et al., 1986). From the fi rst perspective, both have positive
and negative aspects. When avoidance is used to minimize
exposure to a stressor (e.g., staying clear of a bee’s
nest), this is considered effective. When avoidance per-
Part 3
196
Coping responses: Positive skills to cope with
stress.
Palliative coping: A positive emotional regulation
process during a stressful encounter (e.g., responding,
not reacting).
Instrumental coping: The implementation of a series
of effective coping skills to alter one’s behavior
to stress.
Self-effi cacy: A term coined by Albert Bandura to
describe a sense of faith that produces a “can-do”
attitude.
Avoidance versus confrontation: A dichotomy to
describe how some people deal with stress.
Combative versus preventive: Another dichotomy
to describe how some people deal with stress.
petuates the stressor (e.g., not talking to your boss about
his sexual advances), then this is considered in effective.
Likewise, to confront a stressor takes courage, but there
is a world of difference between diplomacy and vigilantism.
Again, coping styles seem to be closely tied to personality.
Matheny’s dichotomy highlights the positive
aspects of each style. The combative style, like confrontation,
is considered to be a physical reaction or response,
whereas preventive coping, initially, is more cognitive in
nature, with the intent to buffer oneself against the
impending stress. Taylor (2005) notes that coping styles
may be a direct result of the strength of available resources.
For instance, a wealthy person with many social contacts
may rely more on external resources, whereas a person
without these is going to have to access inner resources to
deal with his or problems, or suffer the consequences. As
is typical with research, once a concept is well tested,
studies then begin to investigate these models with specifi
c populations of people, such as the elderly and coping
(Krause, 2007), medical students and coping (Dunn et al.,
2008), and fourth-graders’ coping skills with anger (Rice
et al., 2008).
Successful coping strategies to deal with the cause of
perceived stressors involve four basic components. The
fi rst is an increased awareness of the problem: a clear
focus and full perspective on the situation at hand. By
their very nature, stressors tend to encourage a myopic
view, distorting both focus and perspective. A good
coping strategy will begin to remove the blinders to the
true nature of the problem and open your view to a host
of possibilities. Second, effective coping strategies
involve some aspect of information processing. The
dynamics of information processing include adding,
subtracting, changing, and manipulating sensory input
to deactivate the perception of the stressor before physical
damage occurs. Lazarus referred to this as secondary
appraisal. Information processing also includes assessing
all available resources that could be used in peaceful
confrontation. Third, the result of information processing
will most likely include a new series of actions, or
modifi ed behaviors, which, combined with the new
cognitive approach, ambush the stressor from all sides.
The fourth and perhaps most important component is
peaceful resolution. For a coping strategy to be effective,
it must work toward a satisfactory resolution. If
closure is not successfully brought to the stressor at
hand, then the coping technique is less than effective.
The following equation highlights the concepts of effective
coping strategies:
Coping Strategies
197
Effective coping strategies = Increased awareness +
Information processing + Modifi ed behavior +
Peaceful resolution
Although some coping strategies may seem appropriate
for a particular situation, they might fail to achieve a
peaceful resolution, in which case a new strategy should
be chosen. Coping strategies can be either positive or negative.
Positive coping techniques are those that prove
effective in satisfactorily dealing with stress, based on the
accomplishment of a peaceful resolution. This is the goal
of all effective coping strategies: not merely to survive,
but to thrive in the face of adversity. Negative coping
strategies, on the other hand, provide no enlightened resolution.
Instead, they perpetuate perceptions of stress and
further ineffective responses in a vicious circle that may
never be broken or intercepted. Some examples of negative
coping strategies are avoidance of the problem or
inhibition of action, victimization, emotional immobility
(worrying), hostile aggression, and self-destructive addictive
behaviors (e.g., drinking, drugs, food binging).
Is there a relationship between the use of effective coping
strategies and personality? Some researchers think
so. People who exhibit Type A behaviors, codependent
behaviors, and helpless-hopeless behaviors are more
likely to employ a negative coping style and claim victimization
by their stressors. People who exhibit components
of a hardy personality, self-actualization, or
sensation seeking (Type R) are more likely to take calculated
risks, confront rather than avoid problems, and
see their stressors through to peaceful resolution. More
recently, as the secrets of split-brain functions have been
revealed, scholars and practitioners in the fi eld of stress
management and psychotherapy are recognizing the
importance of unifying the efforts of the right and left
brains to effectively deal with stress. This means that
Increased awareness: The fi rst step of an effective
coping technique when one becomes more aware of
the situation.
Information processing: The second step of an
effective coping technique when one works toward
resolution of the problem.
Modifi ed behaviors: The third step of an effective
coping technique when one works toward a sense of
resolution.
Peaceful resolution: The ultimate goal of any
effective coping technique allowing one to move on
with life.
some coping techniques that access different cognitive
functions are most effective when employed together,
such as creative problem solving combined with communication
skills.
Researchers agree there are literally hundreds of coping
strategies. Each coping strategy can be used alone,
but quite often several are used together for a stronger
defense against the effects of perceived stress. And
there is a host of positive coping techniques from
which to choose. Those strategies that emphasize
increased aware ness and information processing
include journal writing, art therapy, cognitive restructuring,
humor therapy, dream therapy, and creative
problem solving. Coping skills emphasizing a course
of action or behavior change include time management,
assertiveness training, social orchestration, and
communication skills. Like learning to use a computer
or improving your tennis game, coping techniques are
skills, and their effectiveness increases with practice. It
is important to remember that no coping technique
will work as a defense against all perceived stress. This
is why it is important to have as wide an assortment to
choose from as possible; it will make the path of resolution
easier to travel. You may notice that some coping
techniques, as well as relaxation techniques, have
the word therapy attached to them. This word may
connote clinical treatment for a physical or emotional
problem to you, but the term is used here as an encouragement,
and a reminder that each person must take
an active role in his or her own well-being.
Expecting the Unexpected
Amid the countless tragedies and needless deaths of
Hurricanes Katrina and Rita (and other calamities
equally intense), there have been remarkable, heroic
survival stories and wonderful examples of calm bravery
and clever ingenuity, all of which underscore the
importance of putting effective coping strategies to
work under the most horrifi c of conditions. In essence,
these essential coping skills are nothing less than survival
skills: ones we must learn to adopt and employ to
deal with the mundane to the most inconceivable events
that await us. Information seeking, assertiveness (in the
form of leadership), creative problem solving, reframing,
prayer, social orchestration, communication skills,
acceptance, and, where appropriate, comic relief are
used time and time again, proving themselves worthy
of their merits. It behooves us to not only learn these
coping skills but to practice them so that we can rise to
our highest human potential no matter the circumstances
we encounter.
Lessons learned in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina
revealed that rapid change can happen to anyone—at
any time. The 2007 California wildfi res that destroyed
several thousand homes and buildings from Santa
Barbara to the Mexican border and resulted in the evacuation
of more than half a million people in southern
California brought this message home once again.
( FIG. 1   ) Whether it’s a personal crisis or a global
disaster of biblical proportions, there are two ways to
deal with stress: The fi rst is to see yourself as a victim.
The second is to see yourself as the victor. Those who
claim victimization tend to act out with a host of stressprone
personality traits (Chapter 6) to reinforce feelings
and attitudes of victim consciousness. Conversely, those
who take the high road with a conscious choice to rise
above the problems they face tend to use effective coping
techniques to become the victor over their stress
rather than the victim of it. Homeowners interviewed
after the devastating California fi res often showed the
epitome of hardiness by stating that they would return
to the rubble and start rebuilding.
If history is any indication of the future, this we surely
know: There will be more fl oods, fi res, hurricanes,
droughts, earthquakes, and senseless acts of violence in
the coming years. In each case there will be one of two
ways to turn: victim or victor. We, too, can learn from
the experiences of those who weathered through the
turbulent times of Hurricane Katrina, the southern
Part 3
198
Survivors of the 2007 California
wildfi res demonstrated an array
of essential coping skills to help deal successfully
with this life-changing event. Their lives offer us
tremendous examples of ways in which to work
toward a peaceful resolution of stress.
FIGURE 1
augment or even become coping mechanisms in their
own right. This is no coincidence because the mind and
body can no longer be viewed as two separate entities.
Humor therapy and laughter, once thought to be defense
mechanisms, are now proven to produce a physiological
home ostatic effect that strengthens the integrity of the
immune system (as explained in Chapter 12). In some
people, habitual practice of endurance exercise triggers
a switch to include right-brain cognitive functions, thus
augmenting awareness and information-processing
abilities. In fact, there can be many crossover effects. In
the organization of this book, however, I designated
each technique as either primarily a coping skill or primarily
a relaxation technique and placed it according to
its greatest infl uence on either resolving the cause of
stress or intercepting the stress response.
I recommend that you try all the following coping
techniques when and where appropriate. Each technique
has its particular strength. You may fi nd many
of these suitable to your own current management
style. As time moves on and the effectiveness of some
techniques diminishes, you may want to reread some
of the chapters to reacquaint yourself with other coping
techniques that may become more suitable later on
in your journey through life.
Coping Strategies
199
California fi res, and other equally devastating life transitions
that happen nearly each and every day. The
choice is ours.
Conclusion
It would be impossible to cover all of the positive coping
techniques in this book. But the following chapters
cover some of the more common and effective strategies
offer ing assistance to the monumental stressors and
daily hassles we encounter. The format of the chapters
is the same throughout Part 3. First, the elements of the
specifi c coping technique are introduced and defi ned,
followed by a brief historical account where applicable.
Then, a description of positive psychological (and physiological)
effects are highlighted, and each chapter concludes
with a list of steps on how to initiate the coping
mechanism as a viable technique in your own strategy
for stress reduction. (An exception is Chapter 13,
“Creative Problem Solving,” which deviates a bit from
this format in a creative style all its own.)
You may notice a crossover effect with some coping stra tegies;
that is, some designed specifi cally to deal with the
causes of stress also seem to promote the relaxation
response. Conversely, some relaxation techniques can
Cognitive
Restructuring:
Reframing
Everything can be
taken away from man
but one thing—the
last human freedom,
to choose one’s
attitude in any given
set of circumstances.
—Viktor Frankl
Chapter 8
A bounced check. The roommate from hell.
A fl at tire. Alcoholic parents. Stressors
come in all shapes, sizes, and degrees of
intensity. Scholars concur that it is not the
circumstance that is stressful, but the perception or interpretation
of the circumstance. We now know that if the
perception is negative, it can become both a mental and
physical liability. Whatever the event, perceptions can
become distorted and magnifi ed entirely out of proportion
to their seriousness. This is referred to as cognitive
distortion (mole hills into mountains), and it turns everyday
problems into gigantic monsters. Attempts have
been made to deal with the “stress monster” from all
angles, including decreasing or manipulating sensory
information and teaching people to control the stress
response by employing various relaxation techniques.
Perhaps the coping skill most advocated—which goes
right to the heart of the matter but is initially very diffi
cult to employ—is favorably alter ing the stressful perception
of the circumstance that has precipitated feelings
of anger and/or fear. This alteration in perception
is made through changes in cognition. Cognition is the
mental process that includes an assortment of thinking
and reasoning skills. Across the country, this coping
technique goes by several names: cognitive restructuring,
cognitive reappraisal, cognitive relabeling, cognitive
reframing, cognitive therapy, and attitude adjustment.
Despite the variations, they all suggest the same
approach: to favorably alter the current mind frame to a
less threatening perception, from a negative, self-defeating
attitude to a positive one, which may then allow the
initiation of the steps toward a peaceful resolution.
The seeds of cognitive therapy took root in 1962 with
the work of Albert Ellis in what he referred to as rational
emotive behavior therapy (REBT). The premise of
Ellis’s work was that stress-related behaviors are initiated
by perceptions and that these self-defeating perceptions
can be changed. He explained that all stimuli sent
to the brain go through a process of interpretation.
When enough stimulation is interpreted as threatening,
it becomes a critical mass of negative thought. Ellis was
of the opinion that once a critical mass of perceived
stress arises, it dims the ability to think rationally. As a
result, a self-defeating attitude becomes reinforced day
after day, year after year, through internal dialogue that
is scripted by the tone of these irra tional thought processes.
Ellis became convinced that people could be educated
and trained to favorably alter negative or
stress-related perceptions (irrational thoughts) into positive
attitudes, which in turn would decrease the intensity
of perceived stress. In a 2008 news briefi ng, author
J.K. Rowling of the Harry Potter series shared publicly
her experience with depression and thoughts of suicide,
and she credited the use of REBT as what pulled her
though her darkest hour. The term cognitive restructuring
was coined by Meichenbaum in 1975 to describe
a coping technique for patients diagnosed with stressrelated
disorders. This coping style aimed to modify
internal self-dialogue by tuning into the conversation
within the mind. The practice of cognitive restructuring
was an important step in what Meichenbaum
referred to as stress inoculation, a process to build up
positive thoughts when negatively perceived events are
encountered. Work by Bandura in 1977 and Beck in
1976 also supported the concept of cognitive change of
perceptions as a means to effectively deal with stress. To
understand how stimuli are interpreted and how interpreted
thoughts are structured from stimuli, let us take
a closer look at how the human thought process works.
A Thinking-Process Model
The human mind is an extremely complex phenomenon,
and one that we are just beginning to comprehend.
Scholars in the discipline of cognitive science have created
a theory, the information-processing model, to
attempt to explain exactly how the mind processes information
( FIG. 8.1   ). This theory suggests that sensory
input (e.g., a fl ashing blue light in your rearview mirror),
sensory manipulation (e.g., danger, speeding vio lation,
slow down, court hearing), and cognitive/behavioral
output (e.g., foot on the brake, pull over to the side of the
Chapter 8
202
Cognitive distortion: Distorting a situation beyond
how bad it actually is.
Rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT):
Developed by Albert Ellis as a means to help people
cope with anxiety by changing the perceptions
associated with the stressor.
Cognitive restructuring: A coping technique;
substituting negative, self-defeating thoughts
with positive, affi rming thoughts that change
perceptions of stressors from threatening to
nonthreatening.
Information-processing model: A model that
reveals how we potentially perceive sensory information,
for better or worse.
road, pray), as well as a feedback system to correct or
refi ne this mechanism (e.g., several offi cers going to the
scene of an accident, calm down), are synthesized to produce
a linear progression of mental processes. Each cognitive
deciphering process begins with an interpretation
of the stimulus that comes into any of the fi ve (possibly
six) senses to determine its threat potential. In simple
terms, stimuli can be interpreted as either threats or nonthreats.
Resulting attitudes can be labeled in one of the
three ways: (1) defensive (negative), (2) neutral (innocuous),
or (3) offensive (positive). Fragments of information,
as well as memories of previous similar experiences,
are then manipulated in a process that results in the
accessing and utilization of either left- (analytical) or
right- (receptive) brain cognitive functions, or a combination
of both. (For a more detailed explanation, see
Chapter 18.) In the fi nal outcome, perceptions and attitudes
are by-products of the interpretation of all sensory
information. It is both the manipulation of stimuli and
the subsequent interpretation process that are targeted
in cognitive restructuring to convert negative thoughts
into neutral or positive ones.
The purpose of cognitive restructuring is to widen one’s
conscious perspective and thus allow room for a change
in perception. The ability to expand perception is not
merely a poetic expression. Research by optometrist
Jacob Liberman (1991) shows that an individual’s perceptual
fi eld of vision actually constricts under stress.
Thus, one literally sees less than the whole picture. Data
analysis by Anderson and Williams (1989) corroborates
this evidence, showing a causal relationship between
perceived stress and loss of peripheral fi eld of vision. As
Liberman points out, stress forces one to see through a
small hole rather than view the entire fi eld of vision or
whole picture.
Unconsciously, many people use a nonproductive coping
technique called rationalization that they think is
one and the same as cognitive restructuring. Cognitive
restructuring should not be confused with this defense
mechanism. Rationalization is making excuses, blaming,
and shifting responsibility away from oneself
toward someone or something else. Freud (Chapter 4)
referred to this as denial of reality. Cognitive restructuring,
on the other hand, involves assuming responsibility,
facing the reality of a situation, and taking the
offensive to resolve the issues causing stress. Creating
and adopting a positive mind frame takes some work.
People often fi nd it simpler to avoid this responsibility
and be consumed by their own negative thinking styles,
which produce a preponderance of toxic thoughts.
Two Minds Are Better Than One
A documentary video called The Secret made international
headlines in 2007 on the Oprah show and Larry King
Live. Using the Power of Attraction as its premise, several
popular self-help gurus spoke to the nature of achieving
ultimate goals of wealth and relationships merely by
thinking positive about these ideals. Countless examples
were reenacted to illustrate the abundance of the universe
and the power of intention. If they could do it, surely you
could, too! The problem is . . . it’s not this simple.
What the makers of the video failed to include (although
this may be revealed in subsequent sequels) is the power
of ego-driven thoughts from the subconscious mind (a
portion of the unconscious mind). So much of our
behavior (some experts think all of it) is directed by our
unconscious minds. Perhaps this concept is best illustrated
by the famous actor Buster Keaton (and imitated
by Johnny Depp in the movie Benny and Joon) who tries
in vain to pick up his hat but repeatedly seems to kick it
out of his reach before he can grab it. If the conscious
mind and the unconscious minds are not acting together,
all the intentions and reframing in the world aren’t
going to help. In the fi eld of psychology this is known as
the “unconscious resistance,” a self-sabotaging effect
that undermines the conscious mind’s best efforts to
make (positive) things happen. It is the foundation of
the negative self-fulfi lling prophecy. Coaches see this all
the time with promising athletes. Physicians see this in
Cognitive Restructuring: Reframing
203
Phase 1: Input
(sight, sound, etc.)
Phase 3: Output
(action, behavior)
Conscious
appraisal of
stimuli
Phase 2: Processing Input
(a) Conscious interpretation
(b) Reasoning
(c) Analyzing
(d) Memory
The information-processing model
of human thought.
FIGURE 8.1
many of their patients too, specifi cally with patients
who say they want to be healed yet have too much of
their identify wrapped up in the disease to leave it
behind. Here is another common example: Consciously,
you want to fi nd that perfect person to go out with (or
marry) and you set your intention. Consciously, you
believe you think you are attracting your soul mate. But
nothing happens. Perhaps the reason why is because
unconsciously you like your carefree lifestyle and really
don’t want to change. Perhaps unconsciously, you still
believe that you are not worthy of a quality relationship.
Regardless of the reason, some belief system (usually an
ego, fear-based one) hidden in the depths of the unconscious
mind is holding on to old ways, thus negating the
law of attraction to its highest potential.
Experts suggest that these old beliefs and perceptions are
learned and adopted early in life (ages 2–6) when the
child’s brain, like a sponge, soaks up sensory stimuli from
the child’s environment (e.g., parents, teachers, siblings).
As the child matures into adulthood, behavior is directed
by these ingrained, subconscious thought patterns and
beliefs. Until they are erased and replaced with new
beliefs and perceptions, not much will change.
To use an apt metaphor, the mind is like a radio playing
music from two stations (the conscious and the unconscious),
but the station you want to hear is being drowned
out by the one you don’t want to hear. In the case of the
radio, fi ne-tuning is in order. In the case of the mind, it
is coming to terms with old, fear-based thought patterns
that tend to hold us back from reaching our highest
potential. If you have doubts as to the power of the
unconscious mind’s infl uence, listen to the choice of
your words spoken. More than just Freudian slips, our
choice of words often reveals the ego’s hidden agenda.
Experts in the fi eld of psychology suggest that the secret
behind The Secret is combining the powers of the conscious
and subconscious minds to achieve one’s goals
and aspirations (Murphy, 2008; Hari, 2005). Bruce
Lipton (Chapter 3) speaks of this with regard to the
health and healing process in which we need to erase
the subconscious tapes and rerecord new thoughts to
help navigate the intended direction of our lives. Some
people erase and rewrite these tapes through hypnosis.
Others do reprogram themselves by listening to subliminal
CDs. Consciously, it can be done through neurolinguistic
programming (NLP). Still others do it in a
relaxed state through meditation and guided mental
imagery. So, here is a question for you: What goals and
aspirations do you have that are sabotaged by early
childhood programming (e.g., trust issues, self-esteem
issues, confi dence, perceptions of leisure, money, or
relationships)? How can you reprogram new (positive)
thoughts, beliefs, and perceptions of yourself that can
steer you in the direction and to the destination you
wish to go? When you can answer these questions you
have really discovered “the secret.”
Toxic Thoughts
Negative perceptions are often the result of low selfesteem.
They also perpetuate it by suppressing or obliterating
feelings of self-worth and self-acceptance. It has
been suggested (Canfi eld, 1988; Ingerman, 2007) that
toxic thoughts originate from repeated exposure to feelings
of shame and guilt in early childhood. Canfi eld
cites a study conducted at the University of Iowa where
parent–child interactions were observed over a period
of several days. Results revealed that, on average, there
were 400 negative comments for every positive one spoken
to the child. It was concluded that negative thoughts
are actually a conditioned (learned) response that is then
carried into adulthood. Catastrophic thoughts are also
reinforced in the messages we receive from the headlines—
rarely does a human interest story beat a cataclysmic
event on the six o’clock news. Disasters, world
problems, and crimes permeate the news, which tends
to condition our thinking toward the negative side of
things. John-Roger even argues that negative thinking
has an addictive quality to it.
The term toxic thoughts was coined in the early 1980s
by several psychologists to educate their clients about
the dangers of negative thinking. Pessimism, a personality
trait heavily grounded in negativism, promotes
toxic thoughts. To demonstrate just how destructive
they could be, Dr. Leslie Kaymen conducted a study at
the University of Pennsylvania in 1989 to determine the
phy siological responses to stress between individuals
who identifi ed themselves (through a psychological survey)
as either optimists or pessimists. All subjects were
exposed to minute doses of pathogens (tetanus, mumps,
and yeast), which, when placed on the skin, would indicate
their stress-tolerance levels. Subjects were then
204
Chapter 8
Toxic thoughts: Repeated negative thought processing
that tends to pollute our view of our lives
and ourselves.
Cognitive Restructuring: Reframing
divided by attitude into two groups, and both groups
were given an impossible task to complete in a brief
time period. While the pessimists quickly gave up, the
optimists continued until the last possible moment.
Days later, the PNI response (skin rashes) of the pessimists
was signifi cantly greater than that of the optimists.
These results revealed that an optimistic attitude was
associated with sound physical health, whereas a negative
attitude perpetuated the mental and physical stress
response. In short, negative thoughts can have a toxic
effect on the body. Kaymen’s data analysis confi rms the
hypothesis that negative thinking can suppress the
immune system.
In an updated version of Kaymen’s work, Andrew
Steptoe and colleagues (2008) designed a study with
nearly 3,000 subjects to examine the biological links of
positive thoughts (mood). Results revealed that both men
and women who reported experiencing a happy mood
had lower cortisol levels, suggesting that happiness and
optimism reduce biological vulnerability. Moreover,
female subjects indicated signifi cant decreased amounts
205
Stress with a Human Face
A tribute to Allison Fisher: In
the spring of 1991, I had a
remarkable student named
Allison Fisher. Allison was bright, energetic, and beaming
with success. At the midpoint of each semester, I
invite my students to do an exercise called “Confrontation
of a Stressor.” I believe that the concepts of stress
management remain only concepts if they are not practiced
outside the classroom. In other words, to know and
not to do is not to know. In this exercise students are
asked to pick one of their top three stressors and are
given two weeks to resolve it—with the condition that
they must enter the classroom with no bruises or broken
bones. Although students are asked to write up this
assignment, on the day it’s due we all sit in a circle with
the lights down low and, one by one, under an agreement
of confi dentiality, we share our stories. This particular
semester Allison went fi rst.
“My stressor is breast cancer; it runs in the family,” she
explained. “My mother has had it—my aunt and my
grand mother, too. For many years I have been scared of
breast cancer, because I know I am at risk. Upon hearing
this assignment, I decided it was time to go for a mammogram.
I was extremely nervous, but last week I made
an appointment with my physician.”
The class was silent, all eyes fi xed on Allison. With an air
of confi dence, she concluded her story with a smile: “I
am happy to say that the test was negative!”
As a graduating senior with a major in broadcast journalism,
Allison was looking forward to a promising broadcasting
career. Less than a month after her graduation, she
found herself working for a PBS affi liate. Within a year’s
time, she took a job with Voice of America and then moved
to Los Angeles to start a highly coveted job as an anchor/
reporter for Channel One, a cable program for high school
youth. Several years later our paths would cross again,
when I found myself in Los Angeles for a book signing. We
agreed to meet for lunch the next day. At that time,
Allison confi ded in me that she was a cancer survivor.
To be a cancer survivor means you confront death face to
face. You challenge it with a mindset rather than run
from it with a defeatist attitude. Being a survivor means
you adopt an attitude of realistic optimism. You acknowledge
the problems at hand, but you focus on the positive.
You live life in the present moment rather than
reliving the past or worrying about what the future may
hold. You break through the fear of dying, the fear of the
unknown, and the fear of isolation, and you come
through on the other side as a victor, not a victim—what
Joseph Campbell called the hero of the hero’s journey.
“I had my fi rst mastectomy over a year ago, my second
one several months ago. The bad news is that the cancer
is back and this time it has spread to my lungs. I’m okay,
though,” Allison said confi dently. Then Allison shared
with me theories and concepts that I had taught her as
a student—but now she was teaching me insights and
wisdom known only from the perspective of a survivor.
“It’s all about attitude. I’m not sure how much time I
have to live now, but I don’t have time for toxic thoughts,
or the fear of what might happen. I chose to look at the
bright side of life, because I discovered long ago that
that’s all that really matters. I don’t know if I will be
cured of my cancer, but I can tell you right now, I am
healed of my disease, because I am at peace, and there
is no greater feeling than this.”
Allison Fisher crossed the threshold of heaven on March 9,
1998 (www.allisonfi sherfund.org).
of two proteins (C-reactive protein and interleukin 6)
that are associated with infl ammation, a factor linked
with heart disease and cancer. Steptoe concluded that
mood states are not merely hereditary, but depend on
social relationships and life purpose.
Attitude has also been observed to be a determining factor
in the longevity of breast cancer patients. A study by
Pettingale and colleagues in 1985 revealed that patients
with a “fi ghting spirit” were more likely to survive
5 years than were those with a stoic nature or those who
appeared to give in and give up. The work done by Dr.
Bernie Siegel is also based on the supposition that positive
thoughts can and do have a positive effect on the
body. The organization of a cancer-support group
called ECaP was developed for what Siegel called the
“exceptional cancer patient,” one who employs hope,
love, faith, and even humor to deal with his or her illness.
Siegel was quick to point out that death is the fi nal
outcome for everyone; yet from his experience, he
observed that a positive attitude made the transition
much easier regardless of when death occurs.
Is it really possible to change the programming in our
minds to break the habit of negative thinking? According
to Richard Bandler and John Grinder (Andreas and
Faulkven, 1994), the answer is a defi nitive yes! Years ago,
Bandler, a psychologist, and Grinder, a linguist, combined
their efforts to create and teach the theory and application
of changing our mental language. They called it neurolinguistic
programming (NLP). The premise of NLP is
based on the concept of uncovering hidden grammar
woven in the unconscious and conscious thoughts of our
vernacular, systematically removing these expressions as
we think or speak, and learning to develop a language of
affi rmative thoughts to positively change the direction of
our lives. NLP is an empowering skill to reprogram the
software of human linguistics so that our human energies
can be focused in the direction of our highest human potential
or human excellence. Part sel ective awareness, part
self-hypnosis, the dynamics of NLP work to eliminate the
self-defeating thoughts that inhibit our energies and keep
us from reaching our goals. Over the years, NLP has
proven quite successful and is used by athletes, actors,
executives, business associates, lawyers, and professionals
from all walks of life. By encouraging reprogramming and
eliminating from daily vernacular words, phrases, and
thoughts that reinforce stress-prone behaviors, NLP helps
one to unlearn old thoughts and learn a new approach
toward optimal excellence. NLP Comprehensive, based
in Boulder, Colorado, offers seminars and workshops in
the dyna mics of NLP. Understanding that one cannot
change behaviors quickly as a result of a one- or two-day
workshop, the NLP training coaches participants through
a 21-day Achievement Program to help decondition and
reprogram the human thought process.
Far more than lauding creative and optimistic thinking
styles, Western culture rewards and praises critical thinking,
the ability to judge and analyze situations, breaking
them down into smaller, more manageable parts. In
theory, when problems are dismantled into smaller
pieces, they are easier to understand. Under stress, an
emotional side effect of critical thinking is that smaller
pieces of stressful stimuli may be considered less threatening
to the ego and thus help to minimize emotional
pain. In practice, though, when critical thought pro cesses
are directed toward the self, judgmental and analytical
thoughts often nurture a negative perspective about
yourself, making you more vulnerable to the perceptions
of stress. When threatened, critical thought can become a
defensive weapon to protect the components of your
identity. In addition to critical thinking, a common mental
attitude seen in American culture is victimization.
Victim ization is a perceptual attitude wherein one feels
specifi cally targeted by events or circumstances and has
no choice but to suffer the consequences. In dividuals who
see themselves as victims often seek pity and sympathy
from their friends as a means of coping with the stressors
at hand. Through the sympathy of others, they validate
their own perceptions of personal violation. People who
express feelings of victimization apply what psychologists
refer to as attribution theory, blaming other people
or factors for perceived injustices (Taylor, 2006).
The concept of victimization is closely associated with
Rotter’s concept of locus of control, where people who
feel violated by stressors are more greatly infl uenced by
external sources than by internal strength and
inspiration. Here is a simple test to detect use of the victimization
attitude: During the next casual conversation
you encounter, listen objectively to what is said and
notice how often people appear to fall victim to their
bosses, spouses, roommates, kids, traffi c, the weather, or
any other circumstance in the vicinity. Next, listen
Chapter 8
206
Neurolinguistic programming (NLP): A program designed
to look at how our thoughts control our language
and how our language infl uences our behavior.
Victimization: A mindset of continually seeing
yourself as a victim.
objectively to how you present your perceptions to others
when you describe your own levels of stress. Do you
consciously or unconsciously label yourself as a victim?
Many people take great comfort in being a victim
because it fulfi lls an immediate need to feel needed, as
well as the instant gratifi cation of sympathy and pity.
People who take on the role of one of life’s victims (a
characteristic of codependency) often see themselves as
martyrs. This is a socially rewarding role, so they fi nd it
diffi cult to change their perceptions.
Can optimism be learned? According to Martin Seligman
the answer is yes! In his much-acclaimed book, Learned
Optimism, Seligman states that we are most likely to learn
the traits of optimism or pessimism from our parents, but
even if the environment in which we were raised was a
negative one, we can cultivate the aspect of optimistic
thinking and gravitate toward a positive approach to life.
Seligman studied several nationally ranked swimmers
prior to the 1988 Olympics and soon realized that optimism
is not only an inherent trait, but one that can be
augmented or learned. Using a term he coined, fl exible
optimism, Seligman (Chapter 4) states that although the
Cognitive Restructuring: Reframing
207
The human mind can be our greatest asset or our worst
liability. Under the infl uence of the ego, the mind
becomes misguided and heads down a path of self-sabotage.
All of this is exacerbated in times of stress. This
behavior in psychological circles is known as cognitive
distortion. It can be said that cognitive distortions are
spin-offs of Freud’s defense mechanisms. More than the
ego’s intent to decrease pain or increase pleasure, over
time these distortions become a habitual mindset that
can sabotage our best efforts. David Burns writes in
great detail about this phenomenon in The Feeling Good
Handbook where he describes the ten distinct styles of
cognitive distortion that perpetuate perceptions of
stress. Mental thought processes and the behaviors they
elicit cannot be changed until they can fi rst be identifi
ed. (It should be noted that the benefi t of meditation
mentioned in Chapter 18 is to become the observer of
your thoughts.) As you read through this list, ask yourself
if one or more styles sound all too familiar to your
way of stress-based thinking. If you don’t see these in
yourself, ask a trusted friend to give you feedback.
BOX 8.1 Cognitive Distortions: Stop the Insanity!
1. All-or-None Thinking: There is only good or bad,
black or white, no middle ground (e.g., there is
only one way to solve this problem).
2. Overgeneralization: One single negative circumstance
manifests into a life pattern (e.g., A fl at
tire elicits the comment, “This always happens to
me!”).
3. Mental fi lter: A solitary negative detail becomes
the focus of your attention, obscuring the bigger
picture (e.g., an hour drive is tainted by one
driver early on who cut you off).
4. Disqualifying the positive: A negative belief
pattern that eclipses positive circumstances,
reducing any that surface as insignifi cant all the
while focusing on the negative.
5. Jumping to conclusions: Affi rming a negative
interpretation without supporting facts often by
insisting on a strong intuitive feel, which is little
more than projection of one’s own feelings.
6. Magnifi cation: The classic story of making a
mountain out of a mole hill, by exaggerating facts
with the end result in a myopic vision of the situation
and thus missing the big picture.
7. Emotional reasoning: Living the assumption that
one’s negative emotions are a true refl ection of
how things really are.
8. Should statements: A thought process infl uenced
by a “rewards and punishment” mentality in which
one motivates oneself with the words should,
must, ought. This behavior often results in feelings
of guilt or resentment toward others.
9. Labeling and mislabeling: Considered an extreme
form of overgeneralization, statements such as
“I’m a loser, ” or “He’s always a jerk, ” are examples,
in which mislabeling involves words that are
highly charged or emotionally loaded.
10. Personalization: Taking credit or blame for events
that you had little or nothing to do with.
Flexible optimism: A term coined by Seligman to
convey that we can all harness the power of optimism
into positive thinking.
trait of optimism is not a panacea for the bumps in the
road of life, we can harness the power of positive thinking
to help us achieve our goals and promote a greater
state of health and well-being ( FIG. 8.2   ).
The dialogue mentioned earlier that seems to run nonstop
in our minds is referred to as self-talk, and it has
been observed that the preponderance of this is negative
self-thoughts. Schafer (1999) has identifi ed several types
of negative self-talk thinking patterns that produce and/
or perpetuate the toxic-thought process. He lists them
in the following categories: pessimism, or looking at the
worst of almost every situation; catastrophizing, making
the worst of a situation; blaming, shifting the
responsibility for circumstances to someone other than
yourself; perfectionism, imposing above-human standards
on yourself; polarized thinking, where everything
is seen as an extreme (good versus bad) and there is no
middle ground; should-ing, reprimanding yourself for
things you should have done; and magnifying, blowing
problems out of proportion.
One technique to convert negative thoughts to neutral
thoughts, similar to Ellis’s REBT, is called thought stopping.
When you catch yourself thinking negatively, you
interrupt the fl ow of conscious ness and say to yourself,
“Stop this thought.” With practice, thought stopping can
help to disarm your negative critic and give balance to
your emotional thoughts.
As you can see, toxic thoughts are very real. Over time,
these can have consequential effects on the body as well.
But stimulation received by the brain is open to reinterpretation,
and perceptions can change. Metaphorically
speaking, some people appreciate the beauty of the rose
petals, some people sense the pain of the thorns. Cognitive
restructuring is a way to focus on the rose petals.
During World War II, a song by Johnny Mercer and
Harold Arlen hit the air waves and quickly became a
national hit. It was called “Accentuate the Positive, Eliminate
the Negative,” and this song was one of many
credited with helping the nation deal with the consequences
of war.
The Choice to Choose Our Thoughts
In his book Man’s Search for Meaning, Frankl credited
his survival in Auschwitz to his ability to fi nd meaning
in his suffering, a meaning that strengthened his willpower
and choice of attitude. Frankl noted that despite
the fact that prisoners were stripped of all their material
possessions and many essential human rights, the one
thing concentration camp offi cials could not take away
was the ability of prisoners to choose their perceptions
of their circumstances.
One concept that evolved from Frankl’s theory of logotherapy
is brief grief, which means acknowledging and
mourning an unmet expectation but not prolonging the
grieving process beyond a reasonable period of time.
Death-education experts suggest there are three basic
Chapter 8
208
(©1999 Randy Glasbergen. www
.glasbergen.com.)
FIGURE 8.2
Self-talk: The perpetual conversation heard in the
mind, usually negative and coming from the critical
(ego), which rarely has anything good to say.
Pessimism: Looking at the worst of every situation.
Catastrophizing: Making the worst out of every
situation.
Blaming: Shifting the responsibility of a problem
away from yourself.
Perfectionism: Perpetually imposing above-human
standards on oneself.
Polarized thinking: A condition where things are
always viewed in extremes, either extremely good or
horribly bad.
Should-ing: Reprimanding yourself for things you
“should” have done.
Magnifying: A term to describe blowing things out
of proportion.
Thought stopping: A coping technique where one
consciously stops the run of negative thoughts
going through one’s head.
Brief grief: A concept that suggests that some
grieving is appropriate and healthy, versus
unhealthy, prolonged grieving.
stages of grief: shock (denial), anger (depression), and
understanding (acceptance). The time for each stage
will vary depending on the person as well as the magnitude
of loss. Feelings of loss, sadness, anger, pain, and
fear are all natural, but not for prolonged periods of
time. To deny these feelings is unhealthy, just as it is
abnormal to prolong these feelings beyond their purpose.
Brief grief is a strategy to allocate the correct
amount of time to the grieving process (fi nding meaning
in the suffering) and then move on to personal resolution
and growth. When many people are introduced
to the concept of cognitive restructuring, they incorrectly
sense they must adopt a “Pollyanna” or cheerful
attitude and that grief is not an appropriate sensation to
acknowledge. As a result, they reject the entire idea of
looking at the “brighter side” of a situation. Until feelings
of suffering, no matter how big or small, are
brought to awareness, it will be diffi cult to adopt a new
frame of mind. Frankl wrote that even in suffering
there can be tragic optimism; the discovery of lighthearted
moments and personal meaning in the saddest
of times. Even in the death-grip of the concentration
camp, Frankl found it possible to laugh at many of life’s
absurdities. Moments like these helped him get through
his ordeal.
In her classic book Minding the Body, Mending the Mind,
Borysenko refers to the preponderance of negative
thoughts as awfulizing. The process of awfulizing consists
of judgmental and analytical thoughts that greatly
narrow one’s perspective and put our mental processes
into a shallow, one-track mode. The result is what
Borysenko calls regressive coping, a nonproductive coping
skill. Awful izing creates worst-case scenarios for
every situation. Although it is good to prepare for all
possibilities, a worst-case scenario is only one in a wide
spectrum of possibilities.
Psychologists use the term self-fulfi lling prophecy to
describe the link between perceptions/beliefs and their
related behaviors. The self-fulfi lling prophecy can work
to one’s advantage as well as one’s disadvantage. Sports
events are fi lled with stories of athletes who believed
they were winners and proved that indeed they were. In
highly competitive events like the Olympics, the difference
between a gold medal and a silver or bronze is not
only a super lative athletic body, but an accompanying
winning attitude. Many an athlete has lost an event, and
thus failed to meet an expectation, because a seed of selfdoubt
took root somewhere between the starting block
and the fi nish line. Individuals who harbor negative
thoughts about themselves or the situations they encounter
promote behaviors generated by these perceptions.
The result can be a negative cycle that sets the stage for
recurring stressful perceptions and what appears to be a
stagnant black cloud over one’s head; this is the fulfi llment
of the self-fulfi lling prophecy.
An example of this concept occurred in the 1990 hit movie
Pretty Woman, when actress Julia Roberts, in the role of a
Hollywood hooker, described to actor Richard Gere how
she fell into her “career rut.” She stated that while growing
up she received a lot of negative feedback from her
parents and peers, and that these were so much easier to
believe, eroding her self-esteem. Another example is John
Cognitive Restructuring: Reframing
209
In this photo, a recording of opera
singer Luciano Pavarotti is projected
into a small sample of water. The wave trains
in the water reveal the delicate harmonic pattern of
the audio frequencies of his voice. From this, and
many similar images, one can begin to appreciate the
impact (either harmonious or discordant) that spoken
words and even our thoughts—which are more
subtle forms of vibration—can have on our bodies,
which are comprised mostly of water. Source: © 2002
Alexander Lauterwasser. Reprinted with permission
from Water Sound Images. © 2005 MACROmedia
Publishing, Newmarket, NH. www.cymaticsource.com.
FIGURE 8.3
Awfulizing: A mindset where one tends to see (or
hope for) the bad in every situation.
Travolta’s character, Edna Turnblad, in the movie
Hairspray; he plays an overweight woman who refuses to
leave the house for many years because of her struggle
with obesity. This “underdog” trait in both Roberts’s and
Travolta’s characters was one many audience members
could identify with and relate to, perhaps because this
attitude is so prevalent in American society.
To break this self-defeating thought cycle, Borysenko
suggests employing the concept of reframing. Reframing
involves looking at the same situation from a new reference
or vantage point and fi nding some good aspect in it.
Quite often, stubbornness and the comfort of our own
opinions become obstacles to the reframing process. Tools
to initiate the process and dismantle the obstacles include
the use of humor, positive affi rmations, and creativity.
Positive affi rmations are designed to bolster self-esteem.
Confi dence building through self-praise in the form of
positive feedback tends to counterbalance the voice of the
inner critic constantly telling us we’re not up to standards
when we compare ourselves with others.
For example, as a health promotion and stressmanagement
consultant, I meet many people from all
parts of the country and all walks of life. During one
workshop in 2007, I met a remarkable woman from
New Orleans who shared her story of the terrible devastating
experience she endured (and continues to
endure). My interactions with her and others from New
Orleans has allowed me to experience fi rst-hand the
expression of the hardy personality, which scholars
Kobassa and Maddi describe as the stress-resistant personality.
Here is Chris’s story:
Chris is a native New Orleanian. It is a city she loves
with a passion. From the Dixieland jazz and Mardi
Gras to Cajun cooking, New Orleans is loaded with a
unique culture all its own. Living on the Gulf Coast,
however, has its perils. One is no stranger to hurricanes.
They are as much a given, Chris said, as snow
storms are in New England. When Katrina was
forming in the Gulf of Mexico, Chris and her husband
boarded up the house, packed up the car, and
headed north to Baton Rouge. With gale forces up to
150 miles per hour, they expected some wind damage
to the house, but no one expected the levees to break
and cause massive fl ooding. When they were allowed
to go back to their home weeks later, they found
water damage clear up to the second fl oor. Chris lost
priceless heirlooms, family portraits, computers, and
a manuscript of a book she had been working on for
5 years—practically everything she owned.
To lose everything in a fl ood can be devastating. How
do you rebuild your life at the age 35? Chris said it
would have been easy to play the role of victim, but
what good would that serve? “You take stock of what
you do have and build from there. I may have lost my
house and my belongings, but I have my health and my
wits. I am resilient. I will get through this, and I am
determined not to give up, but to rise above the situation
and move on.” And that she has. Rebuilding her
life and rebuilding her house move on parallel tracks,
but within a year’s time she regained her sense of balance.
She says, “Losing everything is both devastating
and liberating. I chose to focus on the positive and that
is what has gotten me through the tough times.”
One fi nal thought about reframing ( FIG. 8.4   ).
Borysenko recounts the story of an Australian friend, Ian
Gawlen, who was diagnosed with bone cancer and given
2 weeks to live. This man adopted the attitude that if he
had 2 weeks to live, he was going to make the best of it. So,
Chapter 8
210
Conscious
Unconscious
The unconscious
mind does not
understand
negative thoughts
According to some experts, the
unconscious mind does not
acknowledge negative thoughts. Thoughts such as
“I won’t get nervous,” are interpreted as “I will
get nervous,” which then often results in nervous
behavior. Thinking positively allows the conscious
and unconscious minds to work together.
FIGURE 8.4
Reframing: The name given to the thought process
where a negative perception is substituted
for a neutral or positive one, without denying the
situation.
he proposed to his girlfriend, got married, and went off on
a honeymoon to the South Pacifi c. Twenty years later, telling
of his experiences to Borysenko, he explained why he
was still alive. He discovered for himself that the unconscious
mind does not respond to negative thoughts such as
“cannot,” “won’t,” and “don’t.” There fore, rather than
telling himself, “I cannot die,” which the unconscious mind
would understand as “I can die,” he fed himself a fl ood of
positive thoughts, such as “I will live,” and he has.
Acceptance: An Alternative Choice
Many times we encounter situations we have no ability to
control: a manipulative boss, an obnoxious roommate, or a
signifi cant personal loss. The reality of the situation is not
pleasant in the best of moments. A common theme found
among the theories of many psy cho logists in these cases is
acceptance (see Chapter 4). The acceptance of situations we
have no control over is thought to be paramount as a stressmanagement
strategy, yet it is perhaps the hardest frame of
mind to adopt. There is a fi ne line between control and
acceptance. This is the essence of Reinhold Niebuhr’s
Serenity Prayer for Alcoholics Anonymous: “Lord, grant
me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, the
courage to change the things I can, and the wisdom to
know the difference.” Acceptance is not an “overnight sensation,”
but rather an attitude that may take several days,
weeks, or months to adopt and implement. Often, acceptance
involves some aspect of forgiveness (see Chap ter 16).
The concept of acceptance is very similar to one described
by Lao Tzu in the Tao Teh Ching. Lao suggested that we
move in rhythm with the universal energy, not against it.
Denial and manipulation, like spinning car wheels in the
dirt, prove fruit less because they go against the rhythm of
natural energy. Swimming against the tide can prove
exhausting, and sometimes fatal. As the saying goes, sometimes
it takes more strength to let go than to hang on.
Finally, the use of acceptance or forgiveness appears to be a
greater tool in the face of anger than of fear.
There have been hundreds of empirical studies to determine
the effectiveness of cognitive restructuring on
health-related problems associated with stress. These
studies have focused on both mismanaged anger (coping
skills for men who battered their wives and children)
and anxiety disturbances, most notably substance
abuse and eating disorders. The results of these studies
indicate that thought processes can be changed to produce
a better state of health, although this is not effective
in all cases (www.pubmed.com).
Steps to Initiate
Cognitive Restructuring
A simple, four-stage process introduced by the fi eld of
behavioral medicine by Roger Allen (1983) is a model
for implementing changes in lifestyle behaviors through
cognition to promote health. The following model
explains how cognitive restructuring can be implemented
as a coping technique to reduce stress. Initially,
this pro cess does not appear to take a lot of time.
Thoughts last less than seconds, yet they may resurface
often in the course of a day. And the feelings these perceptions
generate can last for days and weeks. A closer
look suggests that cognitive restructuring is a refi nement
of the continuous dialogue of the mind, and as a
result is, for the most part, an ongoing process. The
stages are as follows:
1. Awareness. The awareness process has three steps.
In the fi rst, stressors are identifi ed and acknowledged.
This may include writing down what is on
your mind, including all frustrations and worries.
The second step of the awareness process is to
identify why these situations and events are stressors
and, more specifi cally, what emotional attitudes
are associated with each. In the last step, a
primary appraisal is given to the main stressor
and acknowledgment of the feelings associated
with it. If the original perception appears to be
defensive or negative, and inhibits you from
resolving this issue, then the next stage is
reappraisal.
2. Reappraisal of the situation. A secondary appraisal,
or reappraisal, is a “second opinion” you generate
in your mind to offer a different (objective) viewpoint.
A reappraisal is a new assembly or restructuring
of the factors involved, and the openness to
accept a new frame of mind. At this stage, a second
or third opinion involves choosing a neutral,
or preferably positive, stance to favorably deal
with the issues at hand. Remember, a new
Cognitive Restructuring: Reframing
211
Acceptance: Often the fi nal outcome of reframing a
situation: Accepting that which you cannot change
and moving on with your life.
Serenity Prayer: A popular short prayer encouraging
acceptance and wisdom, attributed to Reinhold
Niebuhr.
appraisal isn’t a rationalization process, nor is it a
suppression of emotions. Also, remember exactly
what factors you can control and what you must
accept as out of your control.
3. Adoption and substitution. The most diffi cult part
of any attitudinal change is its implementation.
Once a new frame of mind is created, it must then
be adopted and implemented. Humans tend to be
creatures of habit, fi nding comfort in known entities
even if the “known” is less than desirable.
Pessimism is a defense mechanism, and although
it is not seen as enhancing human potential, there
is comfort in the familiarity of old ways, and
change does not come easily. There are risks
involved in change. Substituting a positive attitude
for a negative perception may make you feel
vulnerable at fi rst, but like other skills that
improve with practice, a new comfort will emerge.
With cognitive restructuring, the new mind
frame must often be substituted when the stress is
encountered, and repeated again and again.
Chapter 8
212
Over the years I have asked various people for their defi -
nitions of optimists and pessimists. All clichés aside,
here are some of their answers:
An optimist is someone who:
  sees the positive, even in a bad situation.
  is carefree and seems to enjoy life without
reservation.
  doesn’t let failure limit his growth as a human being.
  can fi nd redeeming qualities in just about everyone.
  sees lots of clouds in the sky and describes the day
as mostly sunny.
  takes personal setbacks as only a temporary
inconvenience.
  counts blessings instead of misfortunes.
  loses a job and says there is a better one waiting.
  has the ability to reevaluate her expectations so as
not to become depressed when she falls short.
  is a happy person who is nice to be around.
  takes things in stride, is able to enjoy himself, and is
able to adapt to the situation at hand.
  sees things clearly, and accepts what is or cannot be
changed and doesn’t spend time fi ghting it.
  describes a pessimist as a person with potential.
  continually explores new areas of life and can accept
others who are different as unique.
  has enough faith in herself to see her through
a crisis.
  on his deathbed, says, “I have no regrets.”
  has a sparkle in her eyes and a song in her heart.
  is a person who, upon fi nding a penny, says, “Gee,
look—now I can buy twelve CDs.”
A pessimist is someone who:
  expects the worst possible outcome from a situation.
  lacks faith and confi dence in himself.
  spends a lot of time worrying about the bad things
that may happen.
  is a cynic, a person with a perpetual frown on her face.
  cannot accept opposing viewpoints or thoughts
as valid.
  enjoys nothing more than fi nding out that his negative
view is right.
  typically prejudges and pigeonholes others before
getting to know them.
  delights in Murphy’s law that anything can and will
go wrong, at the worst possible moment.
  constantly sees obstacles in her way, which are
usually put there by herself.
  is a terminally unhappy person.
  gains energy by drawing on a negative perspective.
  claims to be a realist, but he’s not fooling anybody.
  sees no silver lining to the clouds, just rain and
dampness, which is a refl ection of her soul.
  screens his experience through a fi lter of negative
perceptions that continually keep his expectations
low so disappointment is tolerable.
  expects very little from other people and treats them
accordingly.
  describes an optimist as being out of touch with
reality.
  not only has a black cloud of negativity over her head,
but created the thunderhead as well.
  faces a major change in life, gives up, and slowly dies
inside.
BOX 8.2 Optimism and Pessimism
4. Evaluation. The test of any new venture is to measure
its effectiveness. Did this new attitude work?
Initially, it may not. The fi rst attempt to shoot a
basket through the hoop may result in an embarrassing
miss. Evaluate the new attitude and decide
how benefi cial it was. If it turns out that the new
mind frame was a complete failure, return to
stage 2 and create a new reappraisal. If the new
mind frame worked, repeat this process with
stressors that demand a change in attitude to
resolve and bring closure.
Some Additional Tips for
Cognitive Restructuring
1. Initiate a relaxation technique to calm your mind.
When a relaxation technique is employed, the
mind begins to unwind and consciousness shifts
from an analytical mode to one of receptivity. In
this unwinding process, unimportant thoughts
begging the conscious mind for attention are dismissed,
allowing greater receptivity to a wider
perspective on the issue at hand. A wider perspective
in turn fosters personal enlightenment and
opens up room for positive thoughts. (See Chapter
18, “Meditation.”)
2. Take responsibility for your own thoughts. In times
of stress we may feel victimized. We may also feel
that things are out of our control. A way to gain
temporary control is to blame others for the personal
injustice of the perceived stressor. Blame is
associated with guilt and guilt can be a toxic
thought. If you fi nd yourself blaming others for
events that make you feel victimized, ask yourself
how you can turn this blame into personal responsibility
for your own thoughts and feelings without
feeling guilty.
3. Fine-tune expectations. It is believed to be easier to
refi ne expectations prior to meeting a stressor than
to reframe an attitude after the fact. Many times
we walk into situations with preconceived expectations.
When these expectations are not met to our
satisfaction, then negative feelings are generated.
Fine-tuning expectations doesn’t mean abandoning
ideals or lowering self-esteem. Rather, it means
running your perceptions through a reality check,
questioning their validity, and allowing them to
match the given situation.
4. Give yourself positive affi rmations. The constant
internal conversation going on within the conscious
mind tends to be dominated by negative
thoughts generated by the ego to defend itself.
Although created with good intentions, a preponderance
of negative self-feedback erodes selfesteem.
Positive affi rmations balance this internal
conversation with good thoughts to enhance selfconfi
dence and self-esteem. Repeat a phrase to
yourself that boosts your self-esteem (e.g., “I am a
lovable person” or “I am a winner”).
5. Accentuate the positive. There is a difference
between positive thinking and focusing on the positive.
Positive thinking is an expression of hope
concerning future events. It is often characterized
by setting goals, wishful thinking, and dreaming.
Although positive thinking can be healthy, done to
excess it can be a form of denial. Focusing on the
positive is reframing the current situation. It is an
appreciation of the present moment. Acknowledge
the negative. Learn from it, but don’t dwell on it.
Focus on the positive aspects and build on them.
Best Application of Reframing
When you fi nd yourself stressed out and are perhaps
entertaining toxic thoughts, fi rst identify what makes you
stressed, and then ask yourself why you feel this way. Get
in the habit of then asking yourself, “What good can come
from this situation?” In other words, what positive aspect
can you learn from that which stresses you out? Recognize
what feelings of anger and fear surface, and then shift
your thinking to a proactive stance so you do not become
the victim of your own thoughts and perceptions.
Cognitive Restructuring: Reframing
213
(© 2001 Randy Glasbergen.
www.glasbergen.com.)
FIGURE 8.5
Chapter 8
214
  All stimuli received by the brain are processed through
interpretation and classifi ed as negative, neutral, or
positive; this process is called perception.
  When the interpretation is exaggerated, it is referred
to as cognitive distortion.
  Cognitive restructuring means changing a perception
from a negative interpretation to a neutral or positive
one, making it less stressful. This process is also called
reappraisal, relabeling, reframing, and attitude
adjustment.
  The seeds of this coping technique were planted by
Ellis in rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT);
the term cognitive restructuring was coined by
Meichenbaum in 1975.
  The information-processing model describing how
stimuli are interpreted consists of four components:
sensory input, sensory manipulation, cognitive/
behavioral output, and a feedback system.
  Negative thoughts are often called toxic thoughts.
Research has now substantiated the hypothesis that
negative thoughts can suppress the immune system.
  Negative thoughts are a conditioned response, starting
as early as childhood, to negative feedback given by
parents, which is transformed into guilt and shame.
  Toxic thoughts come in various styles, including pessimism,
catastrophizing, blaming, perfectionism,
polarized thinking, should-ing, magnifying, and
self-victimizing.
  Frankl brought to light the fact that we have the ability
to choose our own thoughts, to alter our thinking
process and adopt new perspectives.
  Borysenko calls creating negative thoughts awfulizing,
and explains that the way to change these
thoughts is through reframing, wherein the stressful
event is reframed in a positive light.
  Positive psychology is an emerging fi eld that focuses
on human attributes, rather than pharmacological
aids, to cope with stress.
  When there seems to be no positive light available,
acceptance of the situation (not to be confused with
giving in) is suggested. Acceptance, in terms of Taoism,
means to go with, rather than against, the fl ow of
universal energy.
  Allen introduced a four-point plan to reconstruct negative
thoughts: (1) awareness, (2) reappraisal of the situation,
(3) adoption of a new frame of mind, and
(4) evaluation of the new mind frame.
  Additional hints for cognitive restructuring include
meditation to clear your mind, taking responsibility
for your own thoughts, fi ne-tuning expectations, giving
yourself positive affi rmations, and accentuating
the positive aspects of any situation.
SUMMARY
1. What is the thinking process model?
2. How can you best describe toxic thoughts?
3. List the steps to initiate cognitive restructuring.
4. What is cognitive restructuring?
5. What role does the unconscious mind play in the
process of restructuring?
6. What effect does attitude have on human
physiology?
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
Behavior
Modification
How many psychiatrists
does it take to change a
light bulb? One, but the
light bulb has really got
to want to change.
—Anonymous
Chapter 9
At one time or another, everyone has considered some plan
of action for self-improvement. This is especially the case
at particular times in our lives (e.g., when we turn thirty or
forty) and specifi c times and seasons during the calendar
Behavior Modifi cation
217
year: Lent, the summer beach season, and most notably
New Year’s Eve, when the proverbial mental slate is
swept clean by new resolutions. Implementing a change
to advance one’s human potential, however, is not always
easy. It takes concentration, willpower, and a strategy
to stay on a new course. One look at the low success
rates of those who initiate diets confi rms the diffi culty
involved in self-improvement. The reason changes are
diffi cult to institute and maintain is that there are so
many variables to manipulate. These variables include,
among other things, psychological, socio logical, environmental,
and biological elements, all of which can act
as deterrents. Bookstores are stacked with how-to selfimprovement
literature. To their credit, works of this
nature tend to have the longest shelf life of any books,
save literary classics. Biblio-therapy, or self-improvement
through information seeking, has quickly become
one of America’s most frequently utilized coping mechanisms.
Yet, although these books can help educate, infl
uence, and even inspire, they cannot instill willpower
or a desire to change. This inner resource can only be
cultivated, not created, within the individual.
Behavior as a Component
of Personality
One school of thought in psychology states that personality
is made up of three factors: values, abstract constructs
of importance; attitudes, perceptions derived
from values; and behaviors, conscious and unconscious
actions based on attitudes and perceptions.
Values are those aspects that give meaning to our lives.
Values are abstract constructs we adopt early in life by
emulating fi gures of authority, including our parents,
grandparents, and older brothers and sisters, as well as
school teachers and other infl uential people from whom
we seek love and acceptance. They are intangible concepts
such as love, honesty, freedom, joy, wealth, pleasure,
education, privacy, and creativity, to name a few.
They are often made tangible through objects that symbolize
their value. For example, education is a value,
and it is symbolized by books and a diploma. Creativity
may be symbolized by a musical instrument. Values
may consist of morals and ethics, but they include more
than these. Research by Milton Rokeach in 1972 suggests
that each person has a hierarchy of approximately
two dozen values. This hierarchy consists of two levels.
The fi rst tier Rokeach described as instrumental values,
a handful of values that are “core” to the meaning of
the individual. The second level he called terminal
values, those important constructs that lend support to
the core values. A personal value system is not static.
Values can change in order of importance, moving up
and down the continuum, to be replaced by or even
exchanged for others. When values shift or are deleted,
this may represent a confl ict in values, and stress may
ensue.
Attitudes are beliefs based on our values. Although the
number of values in our personal value system is limited,
Rokeach states that each value may carry with it hundreds
of attitudes. Attitudes are beliefs, perceptions, and
feelings based on a specifi c value. Attitudes can be positive
or negative in nature. Negative attitudes are associated
with perceived stress.
Behaviors are considered to be any action, direct or indirect,
that is based on a conscious or unconscious thought.
Behaviors are thought to be physical manifestations of an
attitude based on a specifi c value. For example, clapping
your hands at the end of a concert is a behavior infl uenced
by your perception that the music you heard
sounded pleasant. The music, in turn, can symbolize a
value of freedom, or creativity. In terms of well-being,
behaviors can be considered either health promoting or
health impeding. The behaviors deleterious to one’s
health are often targeted for change.
In Chapter 6, it was mentioned that personalities are
deemed diffi cult, if not impossible, to change. Of the
three components making up personality, psychologists
suggest that values are the most diffi cult to infl uence.
Attempts to change attitudes have met with some success
(e.g., through cognitive restructuring); however,
attitudinal changes may not last without signifi cant
attention being devoted to their associated responses.
Behaviors, on the other hand, have been shown to be the
most likely modifi ed or favorably altered factor to
improve health status. Millions of dollars and years of
research have been spent to understand the concepts
Values: Abstract, intangible concepts of importance
or meaning, such as time, health, honesty, and creativity,
that are symbolized by material possessions.
Attitudes: These are beliefs about our values, often
expressed as opinions.
Behaviors: Actions (direct or indirect) that are based
on conscious (sometimes unconscious) thoughts.
involved in behavior, particularly with respect to those
lifestyle diseases resulting in astronomical health care
costs. Results from these studies indicate that changes
are possible when several factors (biological, psychological,
and sociological) are collectively taken into consideration.
For example, in the treatment of alcoholism the
factors taken into account include genetics, stress levels,
and social contacts.
As complex as human behavior is, there is no shortage
of theories as to why we behave the way we do. Whether
our behaviors are learned or innate, we are creatures of
habit. Here are some of the more well-recognized theories
of human behavior as applied to the practice of
behavior modifi cation. Understanding the nature of
these theories may help you to modify your behavior.
Classical Conditioning. The concept of classical conditioning
was fi rst described by Russian physiologist Ivan
Pavlov in the late 1920s. Pavlov’s theory, based on his
research with dogs, suggests that animals become conditioned
to specifi c stimuli to act in a specifi c way. What
Pavlov observed was that his dogs began to salivate when
they heard a bell that they associated with food. People,
like dogs, can also become conditioned to behave in a certain
way. In this regard, when a stimulus is coupled with
a physiological refl ex, the result can be a behavior with
some pretty deep roots, one that can take years to unlearn.
I am reminded of a student of mine who, upon listening
to a relaxation tape with the natural sound of a brook, felt
the undeniable urge to go to the bathroom. Slightly
embarrassed, she approached me after class and told me
that she felt very uncomfortable with the tape. When she
was a young child, she told me, her mother, who often
was in a hurry to do shopping or errands, would run the
water in the bathroom to get her to urinate quickly. Now
whenever she hears running water, she gets the urge to
go to the bathroom.
Operant Conditioning. Unlike classical conditioning, in
which the behavior is specifi c to physiological autonomic
functions, operant conditioning speaks to the nature of
voluntary behaviors—those that we make a conscious
decision about. Although the concept of operant conditioning
dates back to the late eighteenth century, this
approach to human behavior became the primary focus
of psychologist B. F. Skinner, whose signifi cant work
spanned from 1930 to 1970. In simple terms, operant conditioning
is based on the concepts of rewards and punishments,
in which good behavior is reinforced and bad
behavior is disciplined. The logic to operant conditioning
is that when behavior is positively reinforced, the behavior
is likely to be repeated, whereas punishment is used to
deter unbecoming behavior. Most likely your parents
raised you under the infl uence of operant conditioning,
because child rearing typically uses this style of behavior
modifi cation. But it doesn’t stop in childhood; motivational
techniques such as incentives are used with great
frequency in the business world to boost profi t margins
and work productivity. Variations of operant conditioning
are used in a host of recovery programs as well.
Modeling. Little children aren’t parrots, but if you were
to listen to how closely a child imitates his mom or dad,
you would be amazed at the degree of accuracy in both
language and body postures. Modeling is a name given to
the concept of imitation—that is, a behavior learned
through imitation. Modeling differs from operant conditioning
in that usually no direct reinforcement is involved.
Out of sheer will, a person is motivated to copy one or
several aspects of someone with whom they are closely
bonded or to whom they fi nd some degree of attraction
(Pescuric and Byham, 1996). It may be parents, but in the
age of multi media exposure, it could be any public fi gure
with whom the individual wishes to identify. As might
be expected, negative as well as positive behavior can be
imitated, and often is. More often than not, the expression
“Life imitates art” comes to mind when individuals
are seen to model negative behavior seen on television or
in the movies. Although children often model themselves
after those people they see as heroes, we never outgrow
the capacity to model our behavior after someone we
admire. During the aging process, the word hero changes
to role model, or mentor. Modeling is typically used as a
crucial component in the practice of building self-esteem
(see Chapter 6).
There are several types of behavior modifi cation programs
currently conducted in the United States that
focus on negative health habits. Most of these programs
center on substance addictions (alcoholism, eating disorders,
smoking cessation, and drug addictions) and
Chapter 9
218
Classical conditioning: A learned behavior to a
stimulus with regard to involuntary functions, such
as becoming hungry when the clock strikes 12 noon.
Operant conditioning: A learned behavior that
stems from a voluntary function or something we
make a conscious decision about.
Modeling: The ability to emulate or imitate our
behaviors from the observation of others we respect
(e.g., parents, schoolteachers, and peers).
behavioral addictions (workaholism, shopping, sexual
habits). Additional programs target lifestyle improvement
changes, including time management and assertiveness.
Regardless of focus, the bottom line in all
positive behavioral-change programs is building and
maintaining self-esteem. The focus of this chapter will
be assertiveness skills, which are considered paramount
in the development and maintenance of self-esteem.
But before we look at the skills highlighted in assertiveness
training workshops, let’s examine the dynamics
involved in behavioral change.
The Behavior Modifi cation Model
In learning about their stress-prone personality traits,
individuals often see themselves, or parts of themselves,
as less than fl attering. Acknowledgment of these traits
may in fact contribute to their stress. Whereas some individuals
recognize these traits and behaviors and make
corresponding changes to fi ne-tune their personalities,
others have diffi culty overcoming the obstacles to change.
Thousands of investigations have been conducted to
determine the effectiveness of changes in behaviors to
promote health. The topics of these studies include everything
from substance abuse and wife beating to eating
disorders and insomnia. The majority show that it is far
easier to initiate a new behavior than it is to maintain it
over a prolonged period of time. Motiva tion, it appears, is
strong at the start but fades fast (in about 1 to 2 weeks)
when immediate effects are not observed. To fi rst understand
and then favorably alter factors associated with
unhealthy behaviors, psychologists in the fi eld of behavioral
medicine have devised a model based on observational
research. All successful programs contain this
progression of steps to change behavior. When applied to
lifestyle and behavior changes, these steps may lead
toward improved health status and quality of life. This
behavior modifi cation model has one precursory phase
(denial) and fi ve distinct systematic stages.
Several behavioral psychologists and therapists agree
that denial is actually the initial stage of or a precursor
to a behavioral change. For example, in Chapter 4 we
learned that Freud described denial as a defense mechanism
employed to soften the blow of perceived threats
to the ego. In the denial stage, people refuse to admit
either that they practice an unhealthy behavior or that a
specifi c behavioral practice they engage in is unhealthy.
A prime example is someone with a chronic drinking
problem who refuses to admit he or she is unable to control
his or her drinking. Although not everyone starts
with this stage, many people do. It is often this diffi cult
stage therapists and counselors help their clients to work
beyond, to get to what many people agree is the primary
stage of behavior modifi cation: awareness.
1. Awareness. In the awareness stage, you realize
that you actually think or behave in a certain way
that is unhealthy or less than ideal. In the context
of this book, these behaviors are stress-producing
habits. Awareness may come about as a result of
some educational experience (e.g., a class, public
service advertising, a newspaper article, journal
writing, or the advice of a close friend) wherein
your consciousness is raised about a certain behavior.
Aware ness can also occur when you simply
admit that one (or more) of your current behaviors
is no longer desirable. Once you see this
undesirable behavior in yourself (e.g., codependent
tendencies such as ardent approval seeking
and victimization, or Type A behaviors including
hostile aggression), the process of change can
begin.
2. Desire to change. Many people recognize they
practice a negative health behavior, yet they are
not inspired to change it. Without the desire to
alter behavior, even when it becomes obvious
how damaging it might be, no change will occur.
Many people are aware that consuming foods
with cholesterol is related to heart disease and
that cigarette smoking causes cancer, yet these
behaviors remain intact because the will to change
is less than the immediate desire to hang on to
whatever benefi ts the behaviors provide. Desire
to change usually comes about when the behavior
no longer provides the ability to cope, and in fact
places one square on the path to either disaster or
death. The expression “hit bottom” is often used
to describe the ultimate low point experienced by
people, who then generate a desire and become
quite motivated to make a behavioral change.
Behavior Modifi cation
219
Behavior modifi cation model: A model that illustrates
the steps taken to change a negative behavior
into a positive one.
Denial: In some cases this is the fi rst step of
changing a negative behavior.
Awareness: Learning to become aware of a specifi c
behavior in the effort to change it.
with a healthy or stress-reducing behavior.
Sometimes this behavioral substitution process is
thought out or rehearsed in the form of mental
imagery before it is acted out. In a case where you
have become aware of the habit of self-victimization
(in the way that stressors are described to
others), you change the description of this circumstance
to friends or relatives, thus shifting the
emphasis off yourself and onto the real problem.
Not all changes are substitutions. Some modifi cations
may be additions to the repertoire of your
behaviors. For example, the initiation of one or
more of the several coping skills and relaxation
techniques described in this book may be an
example of additions to your behavior. Usually,
however, when a new behavior is adopted,
because of time limitations, something else in
one’s daily schedule gets pushed out of the way.
This is a refl ection of one’s priorities and values.
5. Evaluation. After a substitution has been made,
during evaluation you should fi guratively “step
back” to analyze whether the new behavior
worked, ask yourself why or why not, and decide
what can be done to fi ne-tune this process when
the occasion arises again.
A Second Behavior Modifi cation
Model: Stages of Change
By some estimates, there are more than 300 strategies to
changing one’s behavior from less desirable actions to
more desirable ones, from going “cold turkey” and hypnosis
to 30-day recovery programs and much in between.
As a child of alcoholic parents, James Prochaska became
fascinated with behavior change and studied the topic
extensively. In 1982, his efforts resulted in what has
become regarded as one of the premier models of behavior
modifi cation, called the “Stages of Change.” Prochaska
and his colleague, Carlo DiClemente, observed that by
and large behavior change (particularly for behavior of
an addictive nature) is not a singular event but a process,
if not a skill (much like an athletic skill) that may take
months or longer to master. What makes his approach
unique is that he acknowledges the aspect of relapse as a
common part of the process and not failure unto itself.
This model contains six steps and includes the following:
1. Precontemplation stage: A stage that might also
be called denial of the problem or unconvinced
that a behavior problem exists.
Chapter 9
220
3. Cognitive restructuring. In this stage, you actually
catch yourself in the act of the undesirable behavior
and think of a new and suitable alternative.
For example, rather than ask someone a closedended,
approval-seeking question such as, “Did
you like my performance last night?” you ask an
open-ended question like, “What did you think
of the performance last night?” This gives the
responder a chance to answer freely and takes the
focus off you. Cognitive restructuring is really
self-dialogue recognizing both current and pending
behavior, as well as the option to favorably
change it (see Chapter 8).
4. Behavioral substitution. In the substitution stage,
an undesirable behavior is consciously replaced
(©2003 Mike Baldwin. Reprinted
with permission of Universal Press
Syndicate. All rights reserved.)
FIGURE 9.1
Behavioral substitution: Substituting a new (positive)
behavior for a less desirable one.
Evaluation: The process of observing and analyzing
a newly adopted behavior, to see if the new behavior
works.
2. Contemplative stage: A point at which a crucial
mass of information is acknowledged to consider
that change might be a worthy choice to make.
3. Determination stage: A period where willpower
is called into play to put the thought process of
behavior change into action.
4. Action stage: A stage when, indeed, action is
taken, yet like an athletic skill, it may take several
tries to get it right.
5. Maintenance stage: The stage where the person
steps into the fl ow of making this change a part of
his or her regular routine. This stage could also be
called “second nature.”
6. Relapse stage: A period where the old behavior is
resumed for a while, until the newer (healthier)
behavior is readopted.
Although Prochaska’s model doesn’t involve a stage for
self-examination per se, this model has been adopted by
many groups and organizations geared toward positive
behavioral change from substance addictions to personal
growth programs. It also has been used for health promotion
programming with regard to weight loss and exercise
programming. Whereas some programs tend to
focus on strengthening the internal locus of control, others
include external incentives or rewards (e.g., T-shirts,
tote bags, coffee mugs) as a means of behavioral modifi -
cation motivation, often with mixed results. This use of
external rewards is one area of criticism of Prochaska’s
behavior model (Robsion and Carrier, 2004). As the saying
goes, “Real change has got to begin from within.”
Is Stress a Trigger for Relapse?
What role does emotional stress play in behavior modifi
cation? The research in behavior change is conclusive:
Stress (threatening perceptions of an event) is the most
likely catalyst of unhealthy behavior. In the fi eld of psychology,
the term used to describe this is antecedent, and
it means that various events or situations perceived as
stressful act as a means to adopt stress-prone behaviors
or revert to old behavior patterns such as cigarette
smoking, drinking, or overeating. Outside the fi eld of
psychology, they are referred to as buttons (e.g., “He
really pushed my buttons”). Does emotional stress affect
your behavior? What are your buttons (antecedents)
that, when pushed, steer you in the direction of less than
healthy behaviors? Becoming aware of these is also part
of any behavior modifi cation process.
As the fi eld of life coaching gains acceptance in American
society, motivational interviewing has become a cornerstone
to behavior modifi cation in this profession.
Motivational interviewing grew out of efforts of William
Miller and Stephan Rollnick (1991) to help alcoholics identify
and change their addictive behaviors. Motivational
interviewing is defi ned as “a directive, client-centered
counseling style for eliciting behavior change by helping
clients to explore and resolve ambivalence. Compared
with nondirective counseling, it is more focused and
goal-directed.” Today this approach is used by many life
coaches regarding all types of behavior change, from credit
card shopping and career goals to fi tness training and various
health behaviors.
Note that when people desire to change or improve
their lifestyles they are typically eager to change all their
undesirable behaviors at once, almost to become new
individuals altogether. This approach, though most
admirable, is often doomed to failure. Behavioral psychologists
suggest altering one undesirable behavior at a
time as the best method.
Many behavior theories, including self-monitoring, classical
conditioning, operant conditioning, and modeling,
suggest that behaviors can indeed be changed. From the
nature of these theories and the research that led to them,
it can be seen that there is no one best way to change
behavior. The current school of thought is that the best
approach to behavioral change is a multimodal approach
(also called the biopsychosocial or holistic model) wherein
many theories and their related techniques are combined
in an attempt to produce a lasting effect. One major focus
of all these theories is self-esteem. It appears that low selfesteem
is associated with virtually every stress-related
behavior. Therefore, it has taken on major importance
with regard to behavior modifi cation, particularly as it
relates to assertiveness and assertiveness skills.
Assertiveness
Assertiveness is described as the ability to be comfortably
strong-willed about one’s thoughts, feelings, and
actions; and neither inhibited nor aggressive in actions
for the betterment of oneself in the surrounding environment.
Andrew Salter is credited with introducing
the term assertiveness, in 1949, to mean an inner resource
Behavior Modifi cation
221
Assertiveness: The term given to a behavior that
is neither passive nor aggressive, but proactively
diplomatic.
Psychologist Dennis Jaffe (Jaffe and Scott, 1984) developed
a continuum of behavior styles employed by people
in their relationships with others. Behavior styles at
either end of the continuum are conducive to stress:
• • •
Passive Assertive Aggressive
behavior behavior behavior
Stress often produces many needs. Specifi cally, it produces
the need to express one’s feelings; other needs are
often an offshoot of these expressions. The need to be
assertive exists when situations arise that involve contact
with other people. The assertive style, rather than
the passive or aggressive, is advocated to minimize feelings
of anger or fear associated with stressful encounters,
and to work toward a peaceful resolution. The
following is a more detailed explanation of these three
dominant personality styles:
1. Passive behavior style. The passive style is where
one is too intimidated to express thoughts and
feelings. As a result, the person usually forfeits his
or her rights and freedoms. A person employing
this style comes across as shy and gives in to other
people’s demands so he or she will be more easily
accepted. A passive style avoids confrontations at
any cost. Consequently, this style makes one feel
used and taken advantage of. The passive style is
thought to be anxiety driven, yet the enactment of
passive behavior results in feelings of resentment
and victimization. The passive style is often
employed by the codependent personality.
2. Aggressive behavior style. The aggressive style is
where one acts to intimidate others and gain control
of their thoughts and actions. Aggressive
behavior includes manipulation, intimidation,
accusations, and perhaps fi ghting. There is little
or no regard for other people’s feelings. Aggressive
behavior may result in personal gain, but also
breeds loss of respect and trust in those who were
walked over and bruised on the way. The aggressive
style is thought to be anger driven. It is often
used by people who exhibit Type A behaviors.
3. Assertive behavior style. This is the preferable
style, in which a person focuses on specifi c issues
and problems, neither belittling him- or herself
nor attacking others in the process of problem
solving (McKay and Fanning, 2000). An assertive
person recognizes his or her individual rights and
222
to deal peacefully with confrontations. The term was
reintroduced by Arnold Lazarus, who defi ned it as
“expressing personal rights and feelings.” Since its
introduction, it has become the major focus in changing
stress-related behaviors.
Passive behavior style: A behavior infl uenced
by intimidation that can often lead to feelings of
resentment and victimization.
Aggressive behavior style: An aggression-based
behavior that employs intimidation and manipulation.
Assertive behavior style: A behavior style that is
neither passive nor aggressive, but one that is tolerant
and considerate in the quest for individual rights.
Chapter 9
Changing behaviors is not always
easy if they have been lifelong
habits. Some behaviorists suggest that change will
take place only when there is suffi cient desire.
FIGURE 9.2
Behavior Modifi cation
223
stands up to protect those rights. Assertiveness
includes expressing your opinion and being able
to defend your rights, but not at the expense of
violating others’ rights. The assertive style minimizes
opportunities to be taken advantage of by
others. Assertive individuals are open, tolerant,
and considerate of other people’s feelings. To be
assertive means to be able to overcome feelings of
fear and to confront issues that demand resolution
as well as communicate feelings of anger diplomatically,
without putting others on the
defensive.
Assertiveness carries with it the recognition of legitimate
personal rights. These have been described by several
therapists, including Davis, Eshelman, and McKay
(2002), and involve the following:
1. To say no and not feel guilty
2. To change your mind about anything
3. To take your time to form a response to a comment
or question
4. To ask for assistance with instructions or
directions
5. To ask for what you want
6. To experience and express your feelings
7. To feel positive about yourself under any
conditions
8. To make mistakes without feeling embarrassed
or guilty
9. To own your own opinions and convictions
10. To protest unfair treatment or criticism
11. To be recognized for your signifi cant achievements
and contributions
Typically, there are some people toward whom we are
less than assertive in our manner. Usually these are people
of higher authority, such as bosses and parents.
Being unassertive, however, can occur with anyone by
whom we feel intimidated, including members of the
opposite sex, people perceived to be more attractive than
ourselves, and all strangers.
Assertiveness Skills
To change one’s behavior, there must fi rst be recognition
that current behavior is undesirable and may in fact be
stress promoting. Once awareness and the will to change
occur, then alternative behaviors can be devised and
implemented. From workshops on assertiveness training
come a host of skills that may be included in one’s behavioral
approach to potentially stressful encounters. The
following are advocated to help improve assertiveness:
1. Learn to say no. We are often asked to assist friends,
family, and co-workers with their responsibilities.
There are in fact times when we cannot complete a
task alone. An American ethic has evolved suggesting
that we must work together and help each
Stress with a Human Face
If you could see Patty’s face today, you would notice
a glow about her. She radiates self-reliance and love.
As brilliant as her smile is now, it wasn’t always like
this. In Patty’s case, the road to inner peace began
with a side trip to hell. At the age of 16, she looked
to all the world like a normal teenager. But the allure
of Fifth Avenue beauty in a weight-conscious society
soon found Patty with an obsession to control her
eating habits. Anorexic behaviors gave way to bingeing
and purging, and the pattern remained an addictive
ritual well into her 23rd year.
Refl ecting back on her earlier years, Patty confi ded, “I
was a perfectionist. I was obsessed with my weight.
Food became a way to escape from my own feelings.
Until I was 19, I denied I really had a problem, then I
tried several methods to stop. Nothing worked.”
In the fall of 1992, Patty pulled out the white fl ag and
checked into a hospital. As she put it, “I hit rock bottom.
It was this or die.” The recovery program she started,
well grounded in the twelve-step approach, led Patty to
become fully aware of her behaviors and then slowly
allowed her to substitute positive thoughts and actions
for existing negative ones.
“Oh, I still get the urge now and then,” she admitted during
a quick visit to my offi ce one day. “But I have never been
happier in my life than I am now. I am at peace with myself
and my higher power. I am very grateful,” she sighed. The
gratitude showed; the sparkle in her eyes said it all.
other in times of need. Over time, this ethic has
become warped so that individuals put other people’s
needs before their own (e.g., codependent
personality). Saying no is mistakenly equated with
rudeness, and doing so results in feelings of rejection
in the other person. But saying yes when it is
inconvenient or impossible results in resentment
and victimization in oneself. Assertive ness training
teaches people to say no without feeling guilty
about hurting someone else’s feelings. People have
the right to refuse a request without harboring
feelings of guilt. Remember that other people’s
problems are no more or less important than your
own, and that you are not required to solve all the
world’s problems. If you have personal obligations
that confl ict with requests by others, then diplomatically
refuse to offer your support at that time.
Do not let other people’s comments generate feelings
of guilt ( FIG. 9.3   ).
2. Learn to use “I” statements. When one examines
stress-prone personalities, it is evident that the
inability to feel and express emotions is common
among the various types. Assertiveness training
teaches people to feel comfortable expressing themselves
by using “I” statements (e.g., “I feel angry
about . . .” or “I perceive what you said to me as
incorrect”). This skill also teaches people to be more
spontaneous with their expressions, rather than
suppressing their feelings. The use of “I” statements
encourages a person to claim ownership of thoughts,
feelings, opinions, perceptions, and beliefs.
Assertiveness training programs teach that opinion
statements may take time to formulate. Don’t feel
compelled to say the fi rst thought that comes to
mind. Rather, take a moment to consolidate your
thoughts into a concise and direct response.
Nonassertive people often avoid describing their
feelings for fear that others will disagree. Fearing
rejection, they also tend to agree with other people’s
thoughts and take a middle-of-the-road
position rather than risk expressing their own
feelings. The use of “I” statements strengthens
ego boundaries. Although strong ego boundaries
might seem more indicative of an aggressive
behavior style than an assertive one, the constituents
of one’s identity must fi rst be recognized
before they can be adjusted or exchanged in the
ego development process.
3. Use eye contact. Body language is a very important
communication skill. Nonverbal communication
is more readily believed than the spoken word (see
Chapter 14). Lack of eye contact during selfexpression
is perceived by others as either dishonesty
or feeling insecure about what you are
saying. Eye contact is often most diffi cult when
you express your feelings toward someone else, for
fear of rejection. Assertiveness training involves
increasing eye contact while expressing various
thoughts, feelings, and opinions. Learning this
skill starts with a short time interval (1 or 2 seconds)
and progresses up to 8- to 10-second periods.
When pauses in eye contact are taken, people are
advised to direct their eyes neither down nor up,
but in a lateral direction momentarily, and then
return again to direct eye contact. Just as poor eye
contact communicates lack of confi dence, staring
(prolonged eye contact) is perceived as a violation
of personal space and should be avoided.
4. Use assertive body language. An assertive tone of
voice with a wimpy posture sends a mixed message
to the person with whom you are communicating.
Chapter 9
224
Hey, Jackie! Can
you help me move
next Saturday?
Sorry, but I have
to say no, John.
I've made other plans.
In the 1980s, First Lady Nancy
Reagan started a campaign to stop
drug use with the now-famous slogan “Just say no!”
This same degree of assertiveness can be used in all
types of situations, including taking on additional
responsibilities you simply do not have time for.
FIGURE 9.3
The message is interpreted as either insincere or
unsure. Postures, the ways in which you carry your
body, either reinforce your message or detract from
it. In addition to eye contact and tone of voice, your
spinal posture and head position reveal at an
unconscious level how you really feel about the
messages you are communicating. It is suggested
that your posture be erect, with your body weight
equally distributed between both legs and your
center of gravity directly above your feet.
5. Practice peaceful disagreement. When opinions and
facts are voiced peacefully so that all perspectives
can be viewed during a decision-making process,
then disagreement is considered healthy. This
assertiveness skill allows the individual to become
comfortable with peaceful confrontation. It is
employed when you feel the need to express an
opposing view and want it to be acknowledged.
6. Avoid manipulation. In the course of asserting
yourself, you may fi nd that others may consciously
or unconsciously try to block your efforts to
accomplish resolution. The following are some
roadblocks of manipulation to be aware of, as
well as some suggested strategies that may help to
dismantle them:
a. Intimidation. Asserting yourself may intimidate
others who are in the habit of using manipulation
and control to get their way. They
in turn may raise their voices and display their
tempers. When you recognize this behavior,
you can defuse it by saying that you want to
hold off further discussion of this issue until
the other person calms down. For example,
“I can see that you are quite angry; let’s talk
about this after lunch.”
b. Content substitution. Sometimes people will
draw peripheral issues into a discussion to
derail the issue at hand. If you become aware
that the concern you brought up has become
lost in tangential issues, quickly shift focus
back to the original topic until your issue has
been put to rest.
c. Personal attacks (character assassination). You
may fi nd that in an attempt to resolve an issue,
the person you are talking to comes back at
you with a character fl aw. One way to get
back on track is to agree, in part, about the
character fl aw and ignore the rest. Davis calls
this response clouding, the attempt to defl ect
an attack by concurring with some part of it.
When employing this technique, rephrase the
attack in your best interest, and get back to the
issue at hand.
d. Avoidance. Often people deny there is a problem
by avoiding specifi c issues or their feelings
about certain concerns. This roadblock can
be confronted with a bold inquiry—a direct
question—to unlock their perceptions. For
example, “Is there something I did to make
you angry?”
7. Respond rather than react. A reaction is a type of
refl ex, almost instinctual in nature, and a very
natural part of human behavior. Here, a reaction
deals with spontaneous emotional thoughts.
Although spontaneity is an admirable trait where
creativity is concerned, following through on
emotional reactions can lead to some regrets. A
response, on the other hand, is a thought-out plan
for a situation. Many times our response is the
same as our reaction, and this is when we are
likely to wish we had thought before we spoke or
acted. Responding to a situation means acknowledging
your initial reaction, then thinking of a
reasonable response to the situation at hand. Not
every response will seem adequate, but as you
practice this skill, you will fi nd that it will help
you deal with your perceptions of stress.
These are just a few of the recommended behaviors
taught in assertiveness-training workshops. The purpose
of all these skills is to build and maintain selfesteem.
Box 9.1 contains exercises to increase your
awareness of your own assertiveness skills. They are
based on common circumstances that typically produce
feelings of anger, fear, and/or victimization.
Steps to Initiate
Behavior Modifi cation
To begin to change an undesired behavior, like smoking,
biting your fi ngernails, or worrying about issues
you seem to have no control over, you must fi rst become
aware of what this behavior is. Using the behavior modifi
cation model, select a behavior that you wish to change
or modify. The following is a systematic approach to
behavior modifi cation:
Behavior Modifi cation
225
1. Select an undesirable behavior you are aware that
you perform.
2. Ask yourself how motivated you are to change
this behavior. (As with any change there will be
sacrifi ce involved.) Ask yourself if the costs will
outweigh the benefi ts.
3. Think about what changes in your perceptions
and attitudes must accompany this behavioral
change.
4. Specify what new behavior you wish to adopt. It
is best not to think of stating that you want to stop
the old behavior, a negative thought process (e.g.,
I don’t want to bite my nails). The new behavior
should be expressed as a positive goal (e.g., I
would like to have long fi ngernails).
5. After trying the new behavior, ask yourself how
you did. Was your fi rst or second attempt successful?
Why or why not? If not, what other approach
can you take to accomplish your goal?
It is a good idea to regularly monitor the thoughts and
actions that seem to surface during stressful episodes
and issues that disrupt your sense of inner peace. Then,
using the behavior modifi cation model, take yourself
through the remaining steps. Remember, it is important
not to change all target behaviors at once. Try to
modify one behavior at a time.
Chapter 9
226
Write your initial reaction to each of the situations
described below, followed by a more assertive response,
if necessary.
Situation 1: A Failed Exam
You receive a poor score on a test (in a class for your
major). You feel as if the grade is not a true refl ection
of your knowledge of the subject.
Initial reaction:
Assertive response:
Situation 2: Poor Boundaries
You come home from class or work starved only to discover
that your roommate(s) have eaten your food
(again). You are on a limited budget and cannot feed
the world.
Initial reaction:
Assertive response:
Situation 3: Strong-Back Favors
Your best college buddy has to move out of his apartment
at the end of the month and has found a new place
to live a few miles away. He tells you that he really
needs some help moving and needs a car like yours, and
he asks for your help with both. You have two term
papers due about the same time.
Initial reaction:
Assertive response:
BOX 9.1 Assertiveness Exercises
227
Behavior Modifi cation
  People are constantly trying to change, improve, and
manipulate their behaviors. Behaviors associated with
poor health are those most often targeted for change.
  Personality is thought to be made up primarily of values,
those abstract qualities that give meaning to our
lives; attitudes, perceptions derived from these values;
and behaviors, any actions based on one or more attitudes.
Of the three, behaviors are thought to be the
most easily infl uenced.
  Many variables affect behaviors, including biopsychosocial
infl uences. To positively affect behaviors, a multimodal
approach is advocated, where biological,
psychological, and social factors are all considered to
provide a holistic approach to well-being.
  There are many ways to change behavior, all having
a common format called the behavior modifi cation
model. This progression of stages includes denial that
a behavior contributes to poor health, or that one
practices an undesirable behavior; then (1) awareness
of the undesirable behavior; (2) desire to change;
(3) cognitive restructuring, a conscious attempt to
change; (4) behavioral substitution; and (5) evaluation
of the results.
  The Stages of Change behavior modifi cation model
acknowledges that falling back on old (less desirable)
behaviors is part of the process of refi ning the skill or
new intended behavior.
  Although any conscious change in behavior can
be referred to as behavior modifi cation, in terms of
stress management, behavior modifi cation generally
includes assertiveness training. The three styles of
social behavior are passive, assertive, and aggressive,
with assertive being the most effective.
  The purpose of every behavior modifi cation program
is to foster assertiveness. Such programs
educate participants to practice several types of
assertiveness skills, on the premise that assertiveness
increases self-esteem.
  The best results occur when an individual tries to
favorably alter one behavior at a time until it
becomes part of his or her regular routine. If several
behaviors are targeted at once, the person often feels
overwhelmed and within a short time reverts back
to old habits.
SUMMARY
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
1. Explain the difference between values, attitudes,
and beliefs.
2. List and explain three behavior models.
3. Describe the behavior modifi cation model.
4. Describe Prochaska’s Stages of Change model.
5. What is an antecedent to behavior change?
6. Explain the concept of assertiveness and list three
assertiveness skills.
Journal
Writing
All sorrows can be
borne, if you put them
in a story.
—Isak Dinesen
Chapter 10
At the turn of the twentieth century, British East Africa,
as Kenya was then known, was a land ripe with adventure,
from Mount Kilimanjaro to the Serengeti Plain. It
attracted many an expatriate from the shores of Europe,
Chapter 10
230
Asia, and the Americas. Among these new residents was
Dane Karen Blixen, new wife of Baron von Blixen, who
settled down to carve out a life at the foot of the Ngong
Hills, just outside Nairobi. A life of high adventure is
not without its stressful episodes. In her 17 years on the
African continent, Karen would contract syphilis from
an unfaithful husband, sever her relationship with him,
lose her farm to fi re, and lose her land to bankruptcy.
Perhaps worst of all was losing the one man she loved,
Denys Finch-Hatton, in the crash of his two-seater Gypsy
Moth plane.
Throughout her life in Africa, Karen wrote. Writing
and storytelling became a release, almost an escape, but
in every case, a means to cope with the changes she
encountered. Upon what she called “an ungraceful
return” to her home in Denmark, Karen began to organize
and compose the memories of her African adventures.
The result: a wonderful collection of personal
experiences intertwining the sad with the sublime (written
under the pen name Isak Dinesen) that became the
classic memoir Out of Africa. Although not everyone is a
novelist, we all have life adventures that merit, often
necessitate, expression—expression that helps to ease
the pain of the soul. In the words of Karen Blixen, “All
sorrows can be borne, if you put them in a story.”
To open up and disclose feelings, perceptions, opinions,
and memories have always been found to be therapeutic.
Confessions of the mind lighten the burden of the soul.
Many religions have adapted this concept for spiritual
healing. This is also the cornerstone on which modern
psychology is based. Although conversation is the most
common method of disclosure, writing down thoughts
occupying the mind is extremely therapeutic as well, as
was revealed by countless American soldiers fi ghting in
Iraq through their blogs. Therapeutic journal writing
can be defi ned as a series of written passages that document
the personal events, thoughts, feelings, memories,
and perceptions in one’s journey throughout life leading
to wholeness. The practice of journal writing has proven
a formidable coping technique to deal with stress. For
years, it has been used by psychologists and health educators
alike as a tool for self-exploration, soul searching,
and the enhancement of personal development.
Historical Perspective
For centuries, people have felt the need to keep personal
records or logs of important information, from celestial
navigation to the rise and fall of the Nile River’s water
levels. Written records served as a basis of comparison
for annual events, lunar eclipses, famines of epic proportion,
and changes of world leaders. In Europe’s Age
of Exploration, when men were inspired to explore and
travel the globe, written records were of paramount
importance. To this very day, world leaders, including
the President of the United States, Iraq war soldiers,
and space shuttle/space station astronauts keep a daily
journal.
The word journal comes from the French word journée,
meaning from sunrise to sunset. Journals originally
started as a means of guidance on long trips, or as a
record of orien tation for a safe return passage. Long
before there were newspapers, most news was written
by people who were describing events contributing to
their own life journeys. Even today, much of what we
call world history is based on the journal writings of
travelers and explorers, including Columbus, Lewis
and Clark, Admiral Perry, and even today’s astronauts.
Journals were kept to record the passage of time as well
FIGURE 10.1 (©Bradford Veley, Marquette, MI.)
Journal writing: A coping technique; expression
of thoughts, feelings, memories, and ideas in
written form, either prose or poetry, to increase
self-awareness.
Journal Writing
231
as distance. Throughout history, many people have kept
journals or diaries to record their everyday experiences.
Many important historical perspectives have been
gained from the written passages of Vermont farm
wives, homesteaders on the Oregon Trail, schoolteachers
in the Southeast, and panners in Alaska’s Klondike
gold rush. Originally, journal writing was something
men did because women were not educated to read or
write. But when women adopted this idea as their own,
the word diary became associated with women who
kept journals. Today the words diary and journal are
used synonymously, yet there still appears to be a feminine
association with the word diary. The distinction
appears to be that diary writing is a listing of personal
events, while journal writing expands personal awareness,
emotional thought processing, and creativity, and
offers seeds of resolution in personal struggles.
One of the fi rst psychologists to study the use of journal
writing was Dr. Ira Progoff in 1975. Trained in Jungian
psychology, Progoff discovered that his own journal writing
allowed direct access to a higher consciousness or spiritual
awareness, which encouraged the search for meaning
in his own life. The fruits of these efforts led him to share
this coping technique with others who might benefi t from
it. Journal writing, Progoff suggested, allows for the synthesis
of personal thoughts, feelings, perceptions, attitudes,
and insights toward spiritual growth. In 1966, he established
a seminar, called the Intensive Journal Workshop,
in which he trained participants in the art of journal writing
for self-improvement. Progoff ’s method of journal
writing, with its use of a three-ringed notebook divided
into twenty-one sections separating various components
of one’s thoughts, sought to open doors in the mind
through various themes or springboards to self-exploration.
His sections included Daily Log, Stepping Stones,
Time Stretching, Dialogue Dimension, Imagery
Extensions, A Personal Autobiography, and Dream
Interpretation, as well as a series of personal dialogues on
a host of topics, from body awareness to societal expectations.
Collectively, these topics provided lessons in making
order out of chaos from the glut of sensory information
that is continually processed in the mind. Journal writing,
Progoff said, allows the writer to initiate a positive confrontation
with several issues that contribute to the understanding
of one’s personal existence.
In an experiment to examine the effects of journal writing
on personal growth, 300 people were recruited from
New York City’s welfare and unemployment programs
and introduced to the practice through Progoff ’s workshop,
in conjunction with a job training program.
Within a 12-month period, more than 90 percent of
those enrolled in the workshop improved their job status
and housing conditions. Credit for these improvements
was given to the enhanced state of self-reliance
attained through journal writing. As Progoff states in
his book At a Journal Workshop, journal writing “plays
an active role in reconstructing a life, but it does so without
imposing any external categories or interpretations
or theories of the individual’s experience. It remains
neutral and open-ended so as to maintain the integrity
of each person’s development, while drawing him further
along the road of his own life process.” He refers to
journal writing as transpsychological, a word describing
the therapeutic effects of self-discovery through
active awareness, which allows the individual to access
personal resources and promotes wholeness.
The Intensive Journal Workshop offered a very organized
method to journal writing, yet some people felt it
lacked the spontaneity and freedom that make selfexpression
through journal writing unique. The current
approach to journal writing, advocated by journal
therapist Kathleen Adams, is called humanistic journal
therapy, where journal writing is a vehicle for the development
and maintenance of the transpersonal self or
the bonding between oneself and one’s enlightened self.
In Jungian psychology, the transpersonal self would be
described as a union of the conscious and unconscious
minds through communication of words, symbols, and
dreams to enhance human potential.
In the past 20 to 30 years, journal writing has often been
combined with other coping techniques for personal
growth. In the Outward Bound program, for example,
which is loosely based on an American Indian rite-ofpassage
custom, risk-taking skills are taught. At the culmination
of this weeklong experience, where survival
skills are put to the test, participants are given journals to
write down their feelings to enhance the soul-searching
and soul-strengthening processes. In a similar type of
program conducted in the Sierra Nevada, author Steven
Foster writes in his book Vision Quest of journal writing
as a supplemental tool for self-exploration in a 3-day soulsearching
rite of passage. Portions of his book are painfully
revealing, with candid descriptions written by those
Transpsychological: A term used to describe the
therapeutic effects of self-discovery through active
awareness in journaling.
Chapter 10
232
who shared their experiences of inner growth and spiritual
development.
Once a privilege of the upper class, reading and writing
have now become birthrights of people in almost every
nation. Yet, although journal writing was once a popular
pastime, the evolution of the high-technology age,
which, in effect, has placed a barrier between humans
and the natural environment, has also undermined the
impetus for self-exploration, with the exception of
blogs. People just don’t take the time to sit and write
anymore. Instead they watch television or surf the
Internet. In previous generations, clergy fi lled the role
of sounding boards to hear confessions of guilt, the sorrow
of loneliness, depression, and emotional suffering.
Today that role has been largely fi lled by psychologists,
who act much the same way. As more research, greatly
inspired by the pioneer work of James Pennebaker, on
the topic of journal writing is conducted, a critical mass
of evidence suggests what was known intuitively all
along: Expressing oneself through journal writing is a
highly effective means to help cope with stress. It is a
practice strongly encouraged in the allied health professions.
In the fi eld of psychology, too, journal writing has
surfaced as a viable tool in the journey to the self.
Journal Writing as a Coping Technique
Journal writing is perhaps the most effective coping
skill available to provide profound internal vision and
enhance the self-awareness process in times of stress.
Journal writing initiates the communication of selfrefl
ection between the mind and the soul, the necessary
fi rst step in the resolution and closure of perceived
stress. Journaling, in its own way, is a vehicle for meditation.
As a technique to clear the mind of thoughts (by
either focusing on one particular theme or jotting down
random thoughts as they surface and circulate through
the conscious mind), a calming effect takes place as
thoughts and feelings are transferred from the mind to
the written page.
Research suggests that journal writing is not only good
for the soul, as a mode of catharsis to express the full
range of emotions, but has proven to be good for the body
as well. In a series of studies conducted by psychology
professor James Pennebaker (2004; Pennebaker and
Chung, 2007), students at Southern Methodist University
were asked to write about a traumatic experience for
15 minutes on 4 consecutive days. Although the immediate
response to these journal entries was often tears, even
unpleasant dreams, Pennebaker observed that the subjects
sub sequently frequented the campus health center
for “illness visits” less often than the control subjects who
wrote about superfi cial topics. When this experiment was
repeated in collaboration with J. Kiecolt-Glaser, with
blood samples taken before and after the writing episodes,
it was noted that those people who searched their
souls to uncover latent, unresolved feelings associated
with personal traumas showed “heightened immune
function” of T-lymphocyte cells, when compared to those
who addressed superfi cial topics in their journals.
Pennebaker’s work has infl uenced many others to
research the effects of journal writing on both emotional
and physical health. Here are some highlights:
  Expressive writing has been shown to decrease
elevated blood pressure (Beckwith, Greenberg,
and Gevirtz, 2005).
  Affectionate writing has been shown to decrease
cholesterol levels (Floyd, Mikkelson, Hesse, and
Pauley, 2007).
  Expressive writing has been shown to decrease
stress levels in college students (Opre, Coman,
Kallay, Rotaru, Manier, 2005).
  Expressive writing has shown benefi cial health
aspects for people suffering from fi bromyalsia
(Broderick, Junghaenel, and Schwartz, 2005).
  Expressive writing is revealed to help people
grieving a romantic breakup (Lepore and
Greenberg, 2002).
Journal writing is a means of
self-exploration of thoughts
and feelings.
FIGURE 10.2
Journal Writing
233
  Emotional expression helps to cope with stressful
life events (Ullrich and Lutgendorf, 2002; Baikie
and Wilhelm, 2005).
  Expressive writing has proven to be a major cathartic
release for wives of American soldiers serving
in the Iraq war (Hightower and Sherer, 2007).
Prose is not the only style that is thought to be therapeutic
for journal entries. Poetry is strongly suggested as a
proven means to foster emotional catharsis as well.
Although not all poems employ rhyme, the use of rhyme
in writing poetry allows the author to make “order out
of chaos,” thus giving a feeling or sense of control. In
addition, poetic license to use metaphors and similes
describing personal feelings allows a deeper sense of
emotional expression. Emily Dickinson credited her
poetry with the ability to gain a better perspective on the
expression of her own feelings. The healing process of
self-expression through poetry described by Morris
Morrison in his book Poetry as Therapy incorporates
imagination, intuition, and the development of personal
insight—three characteristics essential in the healing
process. The poems in turn augment the self-awareness
process because each poem is fi rst written and then read
in its entirety. As with other journal entries, poems can
address a whole host of issues and emotions. For this
reason, poetry therapy is currently used as a therapeutic
tool in the treatment of emotional disorders. Thus, this
method of writing is encouraged as a complementary
journal-writing style. It could even be suggested that
some rap songs are a form of poetry therapy.
As a coping technique, journal writing seems to offer
both immediate and long-term effects.
Immediate Effects. For a host of reasons, people naturally
tend to have an inability to fully express the entire
range of human emotions. This conscious inhibition of
emotional expression, coupled with the unconscious suppression
of perceptions, attitudes, and feelings, may eventually
result in neurotic (worrisome) behavior or the
manifestation of physical symptoms. The results can be
devastating, perhaps leading one to several visits to a psychologist.
One of the primary goals of psychotherapy is to
nurture self-awareness and honest self-expression.
In the short term, self-expression through journal writing
may serve as an emotional catharsis by getting out
on paper the toxic thoughts roaming through one’s
head. Journal writing allows the release of thoughts,
feelings, and perceptions that liberates the mind and
softens or expands the walls of the ego. Journal writing
has often been called a writing meditation because as
old thoughts are permitted to leave, the empty space
they once occupied allows for expanded awareness of
one’s internal landscape as well as expanded depth of
thought. This expanded awareness is analogous to a
panoramic view from a mountaintop compared to an
obstructed view from the base. Increased awareness
opens the door for increased understanding of ourselves
in our many environments. Writing down personal
thoughts gives one permission to let them go, no longer
thinking about them with the intensity that may have
cluttered the mind and drained energy. Release of
thoughts and feelings may also act as a personal confession,
an honest confrontation of one’s behaviors. And
this is an initial step toward healing both one’s internal
relationship and personal relationships with others. In
addition, unlike conversation or internal dialogue, use
of writing as a channel of self-expression makes the
writer accountable for, or allows the writer to take solid
ownership of, feelings as abstract thoughts become tangible
on paper. (See Box 10.1.)
Poetry therapy: A therapeutic tool; a modality of
writing poetry to enhance both increased awareness
and emotional catharsis of a variety of issues.
The art of journal writing goes back
eons. When taking the time to put
your thoughts on paper, you begin to process not only
what you are thinking and feeling, but also why you
may be thinking and feeling this way. Some suggest
that writing, rather than typing, allows the mind better
quality of time to process (cathart) these thoughts
and feelings to come to a sense of resolution.
FIGURE 10.3
Chapter 10
234
Long-Term Effects. Lewis and Clark made daily journal
entries during their expedition to the Northwest
coast, and they often referred back to them to orient
themselves for a safe return to St. Louis. Similarly, on a
day-to-day basis it may prove diffi cult to observe
changes in personal perceptions and attitudes toward
events and circumstances perceived to be stressful. All
of this increased awareness is paramount to making
desired behavioral changes (see Chapter 9). But by periodically
retracing one’s steps, by rereading previous
journal entries with a degree of objectivity, an awareness
of patterns begins to emerge regarding values, attitudes,
and even behaviors that inoculate against,
precipitate, or perpetuate the stress response. Clues
from reading between the lines may shed light on the
precursors to stress: elements of anger and fear, and levels
of self-esteem that make oneself vulnerable to stressors.
This new awareness becomes extremely valuable
when efforts are made to change these factors. Perhaps
the best phrase to sum up the long-term effects of journal
writing is “personal resolution.” When thoughts are
transferred to paper, the writer can begin to detach
him- or herself from the scribed contents and begin to
look at these as an impartial outsider would.
As a component of stress-management courses I have
taught, I ask my students to keep a stress-management
journal. At the end of the course, each person is asked to
reread all entries over the duration of the course (typically
16 weeks) and write a summary. A journal summary is
not a recapitulation of 4 months of stressors, but rather
what the individual learned from him- or herself by
rereading the entries and noticing trends or patterns in
thoughts and behaviors, primarily trends that promote
anger and/or anxiety, as well as confl icts in values and
factors promoting or defl ating self-esteem. Sometimes,
fi rst-hand accounts of the benefi ts of journal writing are
more infl uential than the theories on which they are
based. In Box 10.2 are selected passages from summaries
written to describe what some students learned from this
coping-technique experience.
Steps to Initiate Journal Writing
Only three essential elements are needed for effective
journal writing: (1) a notebook dedicated solely to the
journal, (2) a pen or pencil, and, perhaps most important,
(3) a quiet, uninterrupted environment to collect
your thoughts and then put them down on paper. There
appears to be no best time of day to write; it varies from
person to person. The end of the day may seem ideal,
but perhaps not convenient. Although the time of day
to write may vary, the suggested frequency of entries is
more established. It is recommended that a good goal to
start with is a minimum of 15 to 20 minutes for each
entry, and three entries per week, to realize the benefi ts
by Jason Alvine, University of Northern Colorado
Having never kept a journal or even thought of writing
down my feelings, this was a new experiment for me.
Although I wasn’t fond of the idea in the beginning, I
learned many things from these exercises. From thinking
of myself as an optimist to thinking of what makes
me angry, I enjoyed writing my thoughts and feelings
in a journal. This activity defi nitely taught me a lot
about myself, how I view others, and what makes me
tick. The main thing this journal taught me was that I
care about others’ feelings more than I let on. I think
that I have more of a sensitive side than most guys
would admit to, but this is by no means a bad thing. I
looked at my values, which is something that I hadn’t
done in a long while, and realized I needed to focus
more on the values that I was raised with than the values
of my friends. I also looked back and saw that I
have a great distaste for violence against another
human being. I strongly believe that violence is a way
for people who don’t know how to deal with their stress
properly to relieve themselves of this perceived
negativity.
These exercises really made me examine myself and look
at how I was, and how I want to strive to be. These
entries made me look at my future and think about what
I want to do with my life. I feel that the exercises reinforced
that the best way to a successful future is to have
success in the present. I do this by keeping up in my
classes and trying to work as much as possible. Working
gives me a sense of what I want to do with my life, and
what I don’t want to do. With my jobs in the past I have
seen the effects of not having a college degree and
where you can end up without it. The journal also made
me think of continuing to write my thoughts down.
Because it is a new technique, I learned to vent my
frustrations and reveal my thoughts without telling anybody.
This was a most benefi cial activity and it made me
think about fi nding new ways to let go of my stress.
BOX 10.1 Refl ections: A Journal Summary
Journal Writing
235
of this technique. Typically, people start out writing a
couple of paragraphs mainly emphasizing events of the
day rather than perceptions of these events. If continued,
however, entries become longer, with more elements
of the author’s personality.
The current school of thought suggests that there really
are no rules on keeping a journal. However, as an effective
coping technique, there are some things to keep in
mind. A journal should include descriptions of both
stressful events and positive experiences. Life is full of
highs and lows, and over the course of time, your journal
should refl ect both sides of the emotional teeter-totter.
In addition, journal writing is not limited to
thoughts and feelings expressed solely in words.
Drawings serve as a wonderful expression of feelings,
thoughts, and memories that words often cannot fully
describe. Sketches also help augment recollections of
images to complement the written text (see Chapter 11,
“Expressive Art Therapy”). It is important for you to
remember that you write for yourself and not for the
pleasure or intent of others. In fact, the best journal
entries are those that are completely confi dential. The
premise of journal writing is to strengthen the bond of
honesty from your mind to your soul. The contents of a
stress-reduction journal aren’t for publication; thus they
are and should remain confi dential. Thoughts should
be articulated, yet unedited. When this premise is acted
on, thoughts and feelings become easier to articulate
and the rewards of inner peace are more substantial.
Although there is no specifi c formula for successful
journal writing, some criteria may aid the writer to use
this coping strategy to deal more effectively with perceived
stress. These include the following:
1. Try to identify those concerns and problems that cause
the most frustration, grief, and tension. Iden tifi cation
and prioritization of stressors are essential in the
self-awareness process. For the fi rst two to three
weeks, this may be all you choose to include in
each journal entry. Journal entries often can best
be started by answering one or two questions, such
as How was my day today? or What thoughts are
occupying my mind right now?
2. Ask yourself what emotions are elicited when these
stressors are encountered. The two major stress emotions
are anger and fear; however, there are many
shades of these emotions, including impatience,
jealousy, frustration, sadness, grief, guilt, and
worry. After identifying your current emotional
state, the question Why? should be pondered to
identify the origins of your emotions (e.g., Why do
I feel frustrated? Why do I feel victimized?).
3. Allow the writing process to augment your creative
process to further resolution. When you have begun
“For a long time now, I’ve known what stresses me the
most. It has been a long time since I’ve been able to
confi de in or let anyone get really close to me. I’ve been
so wrapped up in school for the past eight years of my
life, and it’s really getting lonely. As time goes on, it
gets harder and harder to express myself. In a sense, I’m
scared of situations because I don’t know how I’ll react.
In this aspect, I don’t know myself very well and I’m
afraid to fi nd out. This journal has really helped me get
in touch with myself.”
—A. C.
“This stress-reduction journal offered no cure-all for my
problems, but it gave me valuable help. It helped me
understand and see what I thought. By knowing what
was going through my mind, I began to realize things
about myself, some things I might have never known. A
common phrase I saw in my journal was ‘good enough.’
The paper was ‘good enough,’ the letter I wrote home
was ‘good enough,’ I was doing things so they would be
‘good enough,’ and in doing so, not achieving my potential.
I was striving for mediocrity. I’m trying to break
this bad habit and I think I have made a little headway.
Creativity is now more clear and interesting to me than
ever before. I found myself writing short stories in my
journal or just creating ideas for work or pleasure.”
—J. S.
“When I divorced my husband of seven years I cried on
everyone’s shoulder for months. That was a year ago.
But people get tired of the same old complaints, even
from best friends. So I took refuge in writing in my journal.
It served as a great sounding board. It certainly
helped me heal some very deep wounds. I’ve learned
that there are some thoughts that are best left between
my mind and the pages of a journal notebook.”
—B. T.
BOX 10.2 More Journal Summary Excerpts
Chapter 10
236
to feel comfortable with identifying stressors and
the respective emotions they produce, the next
phase is to create a process of resolution for the
concerns and problems. This includes searching
for viable options and employing them to bring
satisfying closure to the circumstances that promoted
stress (see Chapter 13, “Creative Problem
Solving”).
Perhaps in an effort to address the needs of people searching
to use journaling as a coping technique, several books
have appeared on the market in the past decade providing
guidelines to the art of journal writing. The following
is a compilation of tips, hints, and suggestions that
appear to have the consensus of therapists who advocate
this coping technique:
1. Centering. Before you begin to write, take a moment
to relax. Close your eyes, take a few deep breaths,
and try to unwind. Centering means to be well
grounded or well connected to the here and now.
Sometimes playing soft music or sipping hot tea
can help foster the centering process.
2. Label your journal entries. Identify each entry with
day, date, and year. On occasion you will want to
review your past entries and it is much easier to
recall the events surrounding the journal entry
when this information is at the top of the page.
3. Uncensorship. Write whatever comes to mind
without editing your thoughts before you put
them on paper. Don’t censor your thoughts as
they travel from your mind to the tip of your pen.
Let them fl ow naturally. Journaling is transcribing
your conscious dialogue. Don’t be inhibited
about expressing how you really feel. Also, don’t
worry how your writing style appears. Neat or
sloppy, it makes no difference as long as you can
read it; that is all that matters.
4. Spontaneity. Let your thoughts be free-fl owing.
You don’t have to write in sentences and paragraphs
all the time. Often, in trying to phrase a
thought just the right way, the essence of the
thought becomes diluted or lost. Get whatever
thoughts you have down on paper and then sort
them out however you choose. If you get a mental
block when in front of a blank piece of paper,
draw lines and store your ideas in separate boxes,
or make lists of your thoughts. It is good to have
variety in your journal entries, or the routine of
writing becomes a boring chore. If words fail you,
make a sketch or perhaps try writing a poem.
5. A private place. In theory, journal entries can be
written anywhere, but having a designated place
of solitude lends depth to self-disclosure. Find a
place you can call your own. Open spaces also
provide the opportunity for mind expansion. If
the weather is conducive to sitting outdoors for a
while, fi nd a tree, beach, mountaintop, or grassy
knoll, and make this spot your own as well.
Sometimes combining this technique with music
therapy (Chapter 21) allows the mind to wander
more freely and emotions to surface to a greater
level of consciousness.
6. A private journal. Experts agree that your journal
is for your eyes only. If you make it a habit to
share entries frequently, then the vow of honesty
with yourself is compromised. If you live with
other people (i.e., roommates, girlfriend/boyfriend,
spouse, parents), then it would be a good
idea to keep your journal away from wandering
eyes. A journal is like Pandora’s box to anyone
but the author. You may choose to make it known
that you keep a journal and specifi cally ask that
no one invade your privacy. If someone does, it is
at his or her own risk.
7. Overcoming writer’s block. One reason people fi nd
writing in a journal challenging is that there is the
risk of pain from confronting one’s innermost
thoughts. People become afraid of learning what
is below the surface of immediate thoughts. Pain
arises when the premise of our thoughts and perceptions
doesn’t match the ideals or expectations
we set for ourselves. Fears surface with the realization
of unmet expectations or a change in our
current reality of ourselves. These confl icts can be
painful to the ego. But with pain comes the opportunity
for learning, and learning sows the seeds of
personal growth and development. Remember
that Frankl believed suffering to be an essential
part of the personal-growth process.
At the novice stage of journal writing, a blank piece
of paper, not to mention an empty notebook, can look
mighty intimidating. Some people are reluctant to write
because of the unrealistic expectation that something
profound must be written on every page. A journal serves
as a catalyst to begin and strengthen your relationship
with yourself. Relationships begin with introductions,
Journal Writing
237
background information, and questions. Journal entries
can begin the same way. Writer’s block happens to everyone
at some point. Many people go in cycles, where they
write religiously for months at a time, get a block, and
then abandon their journals for a stretch. Sometime later,
they come back to this coping style after a hiatus of a few
weeks to a month. Writer’s block can be overcome by
trying a new approach or theme to journal entries, including
creative writing or entries in the form of letters. For
example, the book The Color Purple was written as a
series of letters by author Alice Walker to a fi ctitious sister
in Africa. If you fi nd yourself with writer’s block, try
a new format of writing.
In his book Opening Up: The Healing Power of Confi ding
in Others, author Jamie Pennebaker advocates journal
writing as a means of self-expression. Just as there can
be benefi ts to journal writing, however, it can also be
used incorrectly, negating the potential personal gains
to be made. The following are suggestions to keep in
mind when using journal writing as a positive coping
technique:
1. Journal writing should not be used to replace a more
viable coping technique. Journals can be great sounding
boards. The echoes from these passages should
be a strong personal invitation to fi nd solutions to
the problem at hand. Remember, for a coping technique
to be effective, it must work toward a peaceful
resolution. When journal writing is employed
in place of more appropriate coping techniques,
such as effective communication with other people
(Chapter 14) or social engineering of factors for the
betterment of your environment (Chapter 16), resolution
is compromised, if not completely prevented,
and full closure on stressors never comes.
2. Journal writing should encourage, not discourage,
honest feelings. As a coping technique, journal
writing invites the writer to soul-search and turn
thoughts inward. Although many writing themes,
concepts, and philosophies can be used as vehicles
to explore and augment the soul-searching process,
these should not be the specifi c focus of one’s
writing. The primary theme is the writer. Ideally,
journals should be kept confi dential, though often
people choose to share parts of journal entries,
sometimes entire passages. However, if journal
entries are written for an audience other than
yourself, then the likelihood of honesty is greatly
compromised.
3. Paralysis by analysis. Sometimes, when people get
too absorbed in the expression of their thoughts
and feelings, awareness gets fogged in and the
effectiveness of self-expression and self-refl ection
is stifl ed. Cognitive paralysis sets in, which deters
rather than augments the coping process. Be careful
not to get caught in this trap. Journal writing
is meant to give a wide perspective on yourself in
your environment. Make sure you are able to see
the forest as well as the trees.
The introduction of laptops and Web pages has put a
new face on personal writing in the twenty-fi rst century.
While most emails contain no more than a few
sentences (with a postcard writing style), many people
have taken up the art of writing their personal thoughts
in diary form and pasted these writings on their personal
Web pages in what is now called a blog. (The word
blog is an adaptation of the words web log.)
What’s the difference between a personal journal and a
blog, you ask? For starters, a personal journal is just
that—personal. It’s a private relationship between you
and your thoughts and emotions. Journals are meant to
be confi dential. On rare occasions passages or pages
may be shared—but this is the exception, not the rule.
The Internet (including all Web pages) is considered
public; hence, blogs are anything but confi dential.
Although most blogs do, in fact, contain personal
thoughts and feelings, they can best be described as
personal editorials.
So, blog if you wish (it defi nitely improves your writing
skills), but remember that blogging isn’t the same thing
as keeping a journal.
BOX 10.3 To Blog or Not to Blog
Blog: A term depicting someone’s Internet journaling
practice. Unlike a personal journal that is kept confi -
dential, a blog is a public document to express opinions,
beliefs, and news worthy items of the author.
Writer’s block: The inability to write down one’s
thoughts and feelings, usually attributed to fear
(e.g., fear of failure).
Chapter 10
238
Pennebaker reached some interesting conclusions about
subjects he observed keeping journals. First, only a
handful of people (3 percent) wrote every day in their
journals, and while more women than men kept journals,
the difference was not signifi cant. Second, journal
entries were centered less on emotions than on facts to
describe specifi c events, a style that may not have been as
benefi cial an experience as perceived by the journal
writer. Last, he found that journal writers seemed to fall
into two distinct categories. The fi rst group tended to
write only during periods of mental frustration and
monumental stress. The journal became a sounding
board and tended to carry the burden of anxieties. The
second group wrote nearly every day; however, when a
major stressor arose (e.g., death of a spouse, career stress),
a time when writing might be the most help, a safe distance
was kept from the journal and no writing took
place. Pennebaker noted a third group of people, though,
who instead of keeping a journal, wrote letters. Although
this may seem similar to journal entries, letters are often
less than candid about internal feelings about oneself to
oneself. In my work with clients, I have also noticed a
fourth group: people who do not necessarily write frequently,
perhaps once or twice a week, but whose journal
entries tend to be balanced between positive and
negative experiences. The positive experiences are more
factual, and perhaps even integrated into a creative story.
The narratives of negative experiences include inner
feelings to describe the reasons for these emotions.
Journal Writing Styles, Themes, and Ideas
Whereas journal entries can consist of a daily report on
personal events, they can also be inspired by specifi c
themes that surface and merit exploration to give the
writer a new vantage point on him- or herself. Examples
include dreams, rites of passage, values assessment and
clarifi cation, unwritten letters, self-esteem issues, free
thought relationships, things to do, wish lists, creative
story writing, poems, or any topic the writer chooses to
expound upon. Themes can also be conveyed in many
styles of writing, including linear (left to right), circular
(rotating the paper as you write), in boxes, and freeform.
Three of these are as follows:
Thoughts
I gotta
get that
paper
finished
by Friday.
I should
give
Sheila
a call.
Feed
the
fish.
I
feel
exhausted very
over
it's
glad
quite
relieved
kinda depressed
1. The Buzan style. The Buzan writing style for
journal entries, developed by Tony Buzan (1983),
involves words in a pictorial fashion that accesses
both right- and left-brain cognitive functions. In
this technique ( FIG. 10.4   ), you draw a vertical
line to the left of center on the page. Everything
to the left of this line is reserved for thoughts or
perceptions. Examples might include “I have to
feed the dog tonight before I go out” or “My boss
was a jerk today.” In the center of the remaining
two-thirds, draw a circle, and in the middle write
the words, “I feel.” Every time you feel an emotion,
draw a line from the circle out. On each line,
describe how you feel in three words. (Buzan suggests
the use of a different colored pen or pencil
for each feeling.) Whatever comes into your
mind, write down as either a thought or feeling;
do this for about 15 to 20 minutes. You may want
to listen to some soft, relaxing instrumental music
at the same time. This type of journal entry serves
as an eraser to clean the blackboard of your mind.
Once the thoughts are on paper, the mind becomes
uncluttered and achieves a state of mental
homeostasis.
2. The proprioceptive method. Linda Metcalf, author
of the book Writing the Mind Alive, has been teaching
journaling for decades and it was early in her
career that she discovered a way for people to
really get in touch with their inner selves. She
calls it the proprioceptive writing method, and it
consists of synthesizing one’s emotions and imagination
into a culmination of one’s own authentic
voice. The term proprioceptive means a sense of
body awareness, but in this case, Metcalf expands
Buzan writing style: A specifi c journal approach to
access the powers of both the right and left hemispheres
of the brain through words and images.
FIGURE 10.4 Buzan diagram.
Journal Writing
239
the defi nition to include your mind. In essence,
why do you have the thoughts you have? Metcalf
suggests for the best response to play some
Baroque music, light a candle, and have a pad
(unlined paper works best) and pen ready at hand.
She also suggests setting dedicated writing time
several times a week for no less than half an hour
each time. With the focus on writing from one’s
heart space, one writes with focused awareness to
dissolve one’s inhibitions (fears) and builds a
foundation to build trust from within. Metcalf’s
style is to frequently have the writer ask him- or
herself the question: What do I mean by _____?
By answering this question one delves deeper into
the soul-searching process of awareness.
3. A dream journal. Dreams make fascinating
ma terial for journal entries. Jung, remember,
believed attempting to understand the symbolism
of one’s dreams would lead to psychic equilibrium,
a balance of the conscious and unconscious
minds promoting personal wholeness. Often the
loose ends of perceptions and emotions associated
with stress materialize in the dream state as the
unconscious mind works on its own analysis and
resolution process of thoughts and sensory information
received in the conscious state. The
unconscious mind is rich in color and symbols,
yet poor in its ability to express these symbols as
words. Thus, the collaboration of the conscious
and unconscious minds is a dynamic one to deal
with stressors. It should be noted that with the
massive proliferation of television, DVDs, and
other media entertainment, dreams may be less a
function of our own thoughts and more a function
of making sense or relating to that which we
are consuming from these venues. Regardless,
dreams should not be discounted! Although we
often do not remember all our dreams, everyone
does dream. But many times, dreams seem to fade
into thin air the second we wake up and enter the
conscious world. Re searchers who study dreams
have come up with the following list of ways to
help people remember their dreams:
a. Before you go to sleep, write a review of the
day’s events and your feelings about them.
b. As you drift off to sleep, remind yourself, silently
or out loud, that you want to remember
your dreams.
c. Reserve a few quiet moments, with your
eyes closed, when you wake up to recall your
dreams. Linger in a semi-dream state to observe
dream thoughts.
d. Keep your journal and a pen/pencil handy by
your bedside to record your dream thoughts
or fragments when you wake up.
e. Dream thoughts can surface to the conscious
state when triggered by some event in the
course of your day. Write down any dream
fragments.
Return to the passages describing your dream
images and ponder what their symbolism can
reveal to you. Jung believed that every dream was
a source of information. Prompt recording of
your dreams can help prevent distortions created
by the conscious mind. Journal writing can also
be a good outlet to draft a written closure or fi nal
scene of a recurring dream. Recurring dreams
often represent serious unresolved issues that
need to be addressed. Although writing a fi nal
scene to a recurring dream may not fully resolve
each stressful issue, it does initiate increased
awareness that may aid in the resolution of the
stressor that causes this type of dream.
4. Unsent letters. Another topic common to journal
writers is called “unsent letters.” One type of resolution
people tend to avoid like the plague is rifts
occurring in relationships of any kind. The hardest
rift to resolve occurs when a friend or loved
one dies without your getting the chance to say
goodbye. Kathleen Adams (1990) states that
unsent letters provide the opportunity for “the
three C’s”: catharsis, clarity, and completion. As a
cathartic tool, the drafting of an unsent letter
allows release of suppressed emotions including
grief, anger, or guilt. For this journal technique
to prove effective, it is a given that the letter does
not go in the mail so that emotions can bubble up
freely and surface without fear of self-censorship
or reprisal. We all carry excess emotional baggage
from unresolved relationships. The drafting of
unsent letters allows us to lighten our emotional
load. Clarity becomes evident when the writer
realizes there is no chance for rebuttal from the
addressee. Under this circumstance, you can be as
direct as you wish and state exactly how you feel
and why you feel this way. Although writing a
Chapter 10
letter to someone you need to communicate with
does not resolve all issues, it does begin to bring
the unresolved issues to closure. A variation on
this journal technique is to write down thoughts
of anger and hostility and then crumple up the
paper and throw it away. The crumpling adds to
the emotional catharsis.
Best Tips for Journal Writing
as a Coping Technique
Here are some additional tips on getting started on this
most valuable coping technique:
1. Buy a nice notebook (leather-bound journals are
great) to call your own. Investing in a nice journal
deepens your commitment to the journal-writing
process.
2. Sometimes making a list of things going through
your head is a great way to start a journal entry.
Once you get these ideas down, then begin to
expound on them.
3. Consider playing some relaxing background music
(instrumental music works best) to relax the mind
and let the thoughts and emotions fl ow.
4. Consider holding a centering device (such as a
seashell or tumble stone) as a means to start the
soul-searching process.
5. If prose isn’t your thing, consider writing in a rap
style. Remember that putting things to rhyme can
help you make order out of the chaos in your life.
6. Consider keeping a section of your journal for
creative ideas, doodling, and photo collages.
Best Application of Journal Writing
Good-quality journal writing has several purposes. The
fi rst is to act as a personal sounding board—to cleanse
the mind overloaded with perceptions, emotions, and
toxic thoughts. Journal writing is a great way to vent
anger. In moments of rage, a verbal description helps
pinpoint how and why these feelings are surfacing.
Sometimes writing how you feel, and perhaps what you
should have said or would like to say, becomes a draft
script to resolve issues between you and the person(s)
involved in your perceived stress. Writing down feelings
of anxiety and apprehension is a good release of
emotions that can drain your energy. Effective coping
involves the ability to access and employ both internal
and external resources.
The second purpose is to map out strategies for resolution,
both attitudinal perceptions and behavioral
changes. Depending on the situation, these two purposes
can be used as an offensive tactic in the face of
stress, or in strategic planning when in momentary
retreat. As an offensive tactic, journal writing can be
used to cope with an immediate problem. Just by pulling
out a pad of paper and pen and writing down what
is on your mind, thoughts become organized and order
begins to emerge from chaos. In many stressful events,
however, this option is not possible. Then journal writing
can be used as a postponed coping response, perhaps
at the end of the day, to collect your thoughts and process
major events—those chronic stressors—that need
attention. Last, a periodic review of journal entries
serves to increase awareness of trends and patterns in
your thoughts and behaviors. Recognition of trends is
the fi rst step in changing undesired or negative thoughts
and actions in an effort to reach your highest human
potential and enjoy inner peace. Although the primary
resource needed for journal writing is a single notebook,
you might consider having two: one very private one to
be used exclusively at home, and a second one, perhaps
less structured, to be used at work.
Personal computers have added a whole new dimension
to journal writing that was inconceivable just
two decades ago. Many people have found that using
a word processor actually allows them to write as fast
as they think, thereby enabling them to capture the
essence of several thoughts simultaneously, rather
than fi ghting to retrieve some. If you fi nd it easier to
type entries in a personal computer fi le than in a notebook,
give it a try.
240
241
Journal Writing
  Journal writing has been used as a form of selfexpression
and soul searching for centuries. Psychologists
and health educators have advocated journal
writing for decades as a means to increase selfawareness
on issues that need attention.
  Journal writing is said to promote emotional
catharsis when thoughts, perceptions, attitudes,
values, beliefs, and the tensions these create are
allowed to work themselves out on paper.
  Use of soul searching is no coincidence as a stressmanagement
technique because this activity is
the epitome of the emptying process.
  There are short-term and long-term effects of
habitual journal writing. Short-term benefi ts
include releasing pent-up feelings of anger and
anxiety. When a series of journal entries is reread,
long-term effects include seeing patterns and
habits of thought, perceptions, and behaviors that
are not detectable on an entry-to-entry basis.
Putting thoughts down on paper also widens
one’s perspective to become more receptive to
solutions and resolutions to stressors.
  An additional benefi t, demonstrated by
Pennebaker, is that writing about personal experiences
in a journal increases the integrity of the
immune system. Expressive writing has also
proved to benefi t fi bromyalsia patients, wives of
U.S. servicemen, as well as decrease resting blood
pressure and cholesterol levels.
  Not all journal entries have to be written in prose
form. Poetry therapy is likened to making order
out of personal chaos. This coping style is used in
many settings, including prisons, nursing homes,
hospitals, and counseling centers.
  There is no wrong way to write a journal, save
writing too infrequently. This chapter gave a
number of guidelines for effective journal writing,
including several themes (Buzan, dreams,
and unsent letters) that can add variety to your
repertoire of entry styles.
SUMMARY
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
1. Explain how journaling is used as an effective
coping technique.
2. Differentiate between the immediate effects and
the long-term effects of journal writing.
3. List several steps that help promote the journalwriting
process.
Expressive
Art Therapy
Draw me how you feel.
—Sharlene Gin
Chapter 11
Art, as a mode of self-expression, dates back several thousands
of years to the cave drawings in Lascaux, France, and
perhaps much earlier. But just recently in the development
of modern civilization has art become a recognized effec-
Expressive Art Therapy
245
tive coping technique in the fi eld of stress management.
Art therapy is based on the premise that many thoughts,
feelings, and insights are verbally inexpressible. Several
abstract constructs of the human mind lack the necessary
vocabulary to adequately describe the focus, intensity,
and understanding of daily encounters that the
mind tries to process and grasp. This is only exacerbated
in times of stress. Self-expression through visual artistic
media offers a balance to verbal expression in the search
for wholeness through the understanding of our personal
thoughts, feelings, perceptions, and attitudes.
Art therapy has been described by the American Art
Therapy Association as “the use of art in a creative process
to provide the opportunity for a nonverbal expression
and communication in which to reconcile and
foster self-awareness and personal growth.” Art therapy
is centered on exploration of the individual’s internal
landscape, carved and shaped by one’s collective experiences
and delivered through a visual, artistic sense. Art
therapy can strengthen the bonds of self-communication,
thereby promoting greater self-awareness and
self-comfort. Art therapy can also be described as a voyage
of self-discovery, with process and product uniting
to promote self-realization and self-healing. For this
reason, art therapy is considered a coping technique in
the strategic plan to deal with stress because awareness
of problems must occur before steps to resolve perceived
stress can be taken.
If you consider that your thoughts and behaviors are a
product of your unconscious mind (Chapter 8), and the
unconscious mind communicates in symbols, colors,
and images, rather than words, then tapping into the
wealth and power of the unconscious mind as a means
to cope with stress is advantageous, if not essential, for
everyone. Art therapy is a proven way to do just this.
Origins of Art Therapy
The seeds of this discipline took root as early as the fi eld
of professional psychology itself. At the turn of the twentieth
century, Freud and Jung engaged several of their
patients in drawing to better understand several psychological
disorders through the visual expression of their
emotions. But it was the work of Margaret Naumburg,
an American art teacher and director of Walden Art
School, who found the use of art a powerful form of therapeutic
communication for several children she taught.
Naumburg observed that self-expression through spontaneous
art became a psychotherapeutic treatment in its
own right. With the backing and assistance of her colleague,
Dr. Nolan Lewis, she conducted research involving
children classifi ed with problem or troublesome
behaviors at the New York State Psychiatric Unit. Her
fi rst fi ndings were published in 1947; however, it took
several more years for her theory to take root. Naumburg’s
theory dealt primarily with the unconscious expression of
nonverbal thoughts as an important tool in psychoanalysis.
She proposed that with the interpretive help of a therapist,
the patients’ artwork would aid in their own
treatment and recovery.
A second theory, developed by art teacher Edith Kramer
in 1971, suggested that the process of drawing itself was
therapeutic, and that more attention should be given
to the creative, cathartic process than to the fi nal product,
the illustration. Since its inception as a discipline, many
theories have been added to the study of art therapy,
based on the foundation by Naumberg and Kramer. The
role of the art therapist has also matured in this evolution.
Originally seen as the primary vehicle for interpretation
of the artist’s work, the art therapist is now viewed as a
blend of artist, therapist, and teacher. The art therapist
serves as a catalyst to help the artist uncover his or her
Art therapy: A coping technique of self-expression
and self-awareness employing various media to
describe feelings and thoughts in ways that verbal
language cannot.
Art as a personal expression dates
back thousands of years, as shown
in this photo of cave art discovered in the mountains
of Patagonia, Chile, believed to be more than
6,000 years old.
FIGURE 11.1
Chapter 11
246
own meaningful interpretation and to use that interpretation
as an awareness tool to further personal growth
and development. According to art therapist Eleanor
Ulman (1961), the role of an art therapist is “to help people
bring out from within themselves a source of motivation—
the wish to organize the experience of their inner
and outer worlds into a coherent form.”
Not until the 1960s did art therapy emerge as its own
discipline, with specialists becoming trained and certifi
ed in the theoretical basis and application of this type
of therapy. In 1969, the American Art Therapy
Association was established. Originally, in its most clinical
form, art therapy was designed as a diagnostic tool
used by art therapists and psychologists to understand
personality development and self-expression of patients
with clinical disorders. In the late 1970s and early 1980s,
however, art therapy became recognized and accepted
as a coping technique for all individuals to increase selfawareness
as well as act as an outlet for emotional
expression. Cur rently, the benefi ts of visual expression
through various art media are acknowledged for everyone.
To date, research in the fi eld of art therapy consists
mostly of clinical case studies—that is, individuals, who,
in their recovery process, have attained a breakthrough
in self-discovery through creative art. Conventional
wisdom indicates that art therapy initiates a stronger
partnership between the nonverbal, artistic, and spatial
right-brain functions and the analytical, logical, and
verbal left-brain functions. With the evidence gathered
from split-brain research, it has now become obvious
that the optimal human potential involves balance and
integration of the right and left cognitive functions of
the brain. As the discipline of art therapy continues to
expand beyond the clinical setting, a greater understanding
of its benefi ts will be realized.
Today, art therapy is recognized for its many therapeutic
effects on aspects of mental, physical, spiritual, and, most
notably, emotional well-being. Art therapists agree that
there are several goals associated with this technique to
enhance the healing process and well-being. As described
by art therapist Myra Levick (1983), these include:
1. To provide a means for strengthening the ego: to
allow a better sense of identity through discovery
of personal interests and growth issues
2. To provide a cathartic experience: to let emotions
that have an immobilizing effect be released in
the physical act of creating personal expression
through art
3. To provide a means to uncover anger: to employ the
use of colors and shapes to express and detect feelings
of aggression
4. To offer an avenue to reduce guilt: by conveying
inner thoughts of past feelings and behavior associated
with the guilt process
5. To facilitate impulse control: to allow freedom of
self-expression, rather than its repression, through
a positive behavior
6. To help patients/clients use art as a new outlet during
incapacitating illness: to use art as a tool to
strengthen the mind-body connection by using
various art media to augment the imagery aspect
of self-healing
Clinical Use of Art Therapy
Art therapy, primarily drawing and illustration, has
been employed in many settings, including drug rehabilitation
centers, eating-disorder clinics, veterans’ hospitals,
clinics for the emotionally disturbed, prisons, and
oncology (cancer) hospital wards. Often, the manifestations
of physical and emotional problems inhibit people
in the verbal expression of their feelings. Yet, without
some type of communication or self-expression, the
progress of healing is stifl ed. Art therapy serves to break
through this barrier. The dichotomy of hemispheric
cognitive functions, revealed through split-brain
research, has validated the concept that verbal communication
is only one way to express our innermost
thoughts. Feelings of anger, depression, fear, grief,
guilt, and worry, when expressed in graphic form, begin
to release residual toxins of these thoughts from the
depths of the unconscious mind. In guided art therapy,
drawings are either directed—themes or guidelines are
suggested by the art therapist—or spontaneous, with
the freedom to draw whatever comes to mind, to help
release suppressed or toxic feelings.
Every mark, every spot, and every line drawn, painted,
or sketched is considered an extension of the individual’s
mind. Through repeated analysis and interpretation
of the works created by a host of patients from
every conceivable background and with every healthrelated
problem, some recurring archetypal images
appear to represent specifi c parts of one’s personality.
For example, trees ( FIG. 11.2   ) are thought to represent
energy levels or a perspective on one’s life. A full,
leafy tree with a broad trunk is indicative of vibrant
Expressive Art Therapy
247
energy and strong-willed nature, while a barren, skinny
tree suggests frailty, lack of hope, perhaps even death.
Houses may represent either security or imprisonment,
depending on the size of windows, doors, and the location
of people in the setting. All images have importance,
just as all aspects of each image convey a special
meaning to the person who drew the picture (Asperheim,
1982). The recognition of this importance reveals various
aspects of one’s psychic landscape. And, as much
can be revealed by what is not drawn as by what is pictorially
represented. For instance, in self-portraits, people
who draw faces with no mouths or ears suggest an
inability to express their feelings verbally. Long arms
may express a desire to reach out for help or affection.
Short arms may signify feelings of withdrawal. Short
necks indicate stubbornness. Boxed shoulders hint of
the inability to let matters roll off the back.
According to art therapist Evelyn Virshup (1978), the
importance of art therapy is in the process, not necessarily
the outcome. The expression of oneself through art far
exceeds the aesthetic quality to the viewer: “Someone
who is asked to draw how they feel, and is then measured
by the yardstick of aesthetics will feel betrayed, and will
repress further feelings. Creativity of expression is stifl ed
by judgmental evaluation.” A crucial factor in the practice
of art therapy is the collaborative verbal description
of the picture once it has been drawn. The role of the art
therapist is to guide the artist through his or her understanding
of each work. This is done by asking openended
questions such as, What does the picture mean? In
many cases, the artist may not overtly recognize the emotional
signifi cance of the work (e.g., missing features, signifi
cant color selection, or disproportional fi gures) or may
not be quite ready to accept verbally what has been
depicted graphically. Art therapists suggest that, upon
completion of the drawing, the artist try to explain what
the fi gure represents, perhaps even to write it down on
the corner of the drawing. This serves to balance the nonverbal
expression with the verbal expression and further
the communication process of the conscious and unconscious
minds. This combination leads to better awareness
and comprehension of the situation at hand and the emotions
associated with it. ( FIG. 11.3   )
A simple drawing of a tree can
indicate a great many things
about someone and his or her level of self-esteem.
FIGURE 11.2
Nonverbal expression: Many thoughts and feelings
cannot be expressed verbally, giving rise to art
therapy as a means of nonverbal expression.
The artist said after drawing this,
“There is indeed change in my life,
but I see good things on the horizon. I am experiencing
some physical limitations (with my hands) yet I
plan to do some more activities such as hiking and
swimming, etc.”
FIGURE 11.3
In 1971, a radiation oncologist named Carl Simonton
formulated a concept for cancer patients involving,
among other things, the integration of mental imagery
and art therapy. In a pioneer program to teach cancer
patients to take an active role in their own recovery,
Simonton and his then-wife Stephanie designed a strategic
approach to attack cancer from all sides—mentally,
physically, emotionally, and spiritually—with a
host of progressive coping and relaxation techniques. In
perhaps the most signifi cant plank to bridge the fi elds of
alternative and modern medicine, mental imagery and
art therapy were employed as complementary tools to
fi ght cancer cells and help rejuvenate the body
(Simonton, 1978).
On the premise that people must take active responsibility
for their own health, Simonton asked his patients
to imagine a fl ood of white blood cells attacking and
devastating the cancer cells in their bodies. In the creative
minds of his patients, the white blood cells took on
metaphorical images of armies of white knights in shining
armor or schools of great white sharks in confrontation
with their prey. Simonton had several patients
draw pictures of these images to reinforce the power of
visualization. Additional pictures were drawn at various
stages of their illnesses. The progression of visual
images gave striking evidence of the patients’ attitudes
toward their disease and their willingness to attempt to
either augment the healing process through enhanced
willpower and positive attitudes (with some cases of
“terminal” cancer going into remission) or remain passive,
even helpless, victims.
In her pioneering work, Kübler-Ross (1981) has also
used art as a therapeutic tool with children who have
cancer. Those with a limited vocabulary but total lack
of inhibition about drawing were able to express a multitude
of feelings surrounding the many progressions of
the death process. Kübler-Ross found that the utilization
of illustrations and sketches by terminally ill children
served as a phenomenal coping technique toward
the resolution of the emotional and spiritual stress associated
with this traumatic experience. She believes that
self-expression through art has the potential to become
a vehicle to promote wholeness in the individual.
Using an approach similar to Simonton’s and Kübler-
Ross’s, physician Bernie Siegel (1986) also has employed
art therapy among his cancer patients. Whereas most
physicians have their patients fi rst fi ll out medicalhistory
questionnaires, Siegel hands out blank sheets of
white paper and boxes of crayons and asks individuals
to draw themselves in their current state of health or
disease. According to Siegel, mental imagery in the
form of art therapy is more useful than a battery of laboratory
tests to assess a patient’s disease state and prospects
for recovery. He adds that the analysis of these
illustrations is one of the most accurate tools in determining
the prognosis of disease and, potentially, the
development of other health-related problems.
As a general surgeon with a speciality in oncology,
Siegel was struck by several factors hinting at which
patients would succumb to their disease and which
would defy the odds of terminal cancer. Those who
seemed to grab the bull by the horns and took responsibility
for their recovery he referred to as exceptional
cancer patients (ECaP). More specifi cally, critical factors
included will power, humor, hope, and love, all of
Chapter 11
248
Facing radiation (and possible surgery)
for breast cancer, this student
chose to imagine the radiation as light energy
that would heal her body. “Unlike some women who
are forever worrying about their body image, I am
very proud of my body,” she explained. A year later
she wrote to say that she is cancer free.
FIGURE 11.4
which were represented in some aspect of the patients’
illustrations. Not all of his patients had this exceptional
ability, and their draw ings often foreshadowed imminent
death. In the spirit of Jung, Siegel soon came upon
the realization that messages from the unconscious
mind manifest in symbolic images and characteristics.
These images accentuate the patient’s fears, anger, levels
of self-esteem, grief, guilt, and the intensity of the
personal problems and confl icts that ultimately pave the
path to disease. In one illustration, a patient drew herself
at the extreme right-hand, bottom corner of the
page, leaving the rest of the paper blank. This was interpreted
to suggest low self-esteem, which was later confi
rmed by the artist. In a similar episode, a young boy
drew only the top half of his body over the entire page,
leaving the physician curious and frightened. The
young boy then turned the page over to reveal the bottom
half, hinting that recovery was well on its way—
and putting a huge smile on Siegel’s face.
Although there are exceptions, there is a consensus
among art therapists that regardless of gender, nationality,
or ethnic upbringing, each color in art therapy
represents an archetypal meaning. Typically, the color
selection as well as the objects drawn (e.g., house, tree)
parallel emotional expressions of one’s mental health.
The following list suggests associations between colors
and their archetypal meanings:
Red: passionate emotional peaks (from pleasure to
pain); can represent either compassion or anger
Orange: life change (big or small)
Yellow: energy (usually a positive message)
Blue and green: happiness and joy (blue may even
mean creativity)
Purple/violet: highly spiritual nature; unconditional
love
Brown (and earth-tone colors): a sense of groundedness
and stability
Black: (1) grief, despair, or fear or (2) a sense of personal
empowerment
White: (1) fear, avoidance, or coverup or (2) hope
Gray: ambiguity or uncertainty
Not all professionals agree on the association between
color selection and its interpretation; art therapist
Rebecca Crane offers a slightly different explanation. In
her professional experience, yellow and orange signify
Expressive Art Therapy
249
pleasantness or happiness. Violet and red convey unhappiness.
Specifi cally, violet represents grief or death,
while red is used to express anger, frustration, and
annoyance.
Although cancer patients have received the most publicity
from their use of art therapy as a coping technique,
art therapists have also used this tool in the awareness
and recovery process of other stress-related problems,
including migraine headaches ( FIG. 11.5   ), gastrointestinal
problems, anorexia, and post-traumatic stress
disorders of patients surviving the atrocities of war. The
creation of sketches and sculptures has been a signifi cant
tool in the treatment of Vietnam veterans with posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) as described by
J. Horgan (1988) in Scientifi c American. Horgan reported
that many former soldiers were still held prisoner by the
haunting memories of death and carnage, leaving them
emotionally immobilized after returning home. But
An example of art therapy used to
treat migraine headache. Notice
no mouth is drawn in this illustration (supporting
the concept of the somatizer; Chapter 5).
FIGURE 11.5
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD): The mental,
emotional, and physical repercussions experienced
after an extremely stressful experience (e.g.,
war combat, natural disasters, rape and sexual
abuse, car accidents).
through the introduction of this type of therapy, veterans
found a tremendous sense of relief through transferring
their destructive images from the depths of their
minds onto paper, canvas, or clay. Although not particularly
anxious to talk about their war experiences, the vets
used their illustrations and sculptures as an outlet to help
vanquish the emotions associated with their traumatic
experiences and to initiate one facet of the healing and
growth process. Art therapy for Vietnam veterans has
proved so successful that in 1981 an art museum in
Chicago was established for Vietnam vets to exhibit their
work. Efforts have been made with similar art therapy
programs involving Iraq war veterans, as noted by
Washington Post reporter Jackie Spinner (2007).
The treatment of self-mutilation and eating disorders,
particularly anorexia nervosa, has also included art
therapy as a part of the process. In these conditions, the
patient often feels helpless to control his or her existing
environment and identity. Perceptions of stress are
turned inward and manifested through a process of
slow physical self-destruction. Inner confl icts regarding
control issues are manifested through signifi cant weight
loss, which is paralleled by a distorted body image. In a
study conducted at Goldsmiths College employing art
therapy with anorexics (Levick, 1983), it was noted that
the subjects rarely drew human fi gures. When they
were drawn, however, they showed adolescent characteristics
suggesting a denial of adult responsibilities and
physical maturation. Paintings and sketches by patients
often depicted images of isolation and loneliness; in one
case, a subject drew herself as a cactus. Progress was
noted when subjects began to represent their true physical
conditions—that is, they drew themselves in human
form. Art as a means of self-expression by anorexic
patients was perceived to help increase self-awareness
by opening the lines of communication within the individual,
thus acknowledging strengths and weaknesses,
and an increased comfort with both.
In the immediate aftermath of September 11, 2001,
when schools reopened in New York City (and even
other districts nationwide), students were invited to
share their level of stress by drawing their thoughts,
feelings, and images on paper as a cathartic exercise to
relieve emotional suffering, much of which could not be
articulated by words alone (Flatow, 2002). School teachers
in and around military bases are known to often use
art therapy with grade-school and middle-school children
during military confl icts (e.g., the Persian Gulf
war in 1991 and the Iraq war in 2003). Students are
asked to draw their feelings regarding the respective
wars and their parents’ involvement. Typically, the
drawings reveal fears of abandonment, detachment,
sorrow, and loneliness. The bottom line is that everyone,
regardless of their personal experiences, can benefi t
from art therapy.
Just as much can be revealed by a picture, much can also
be revealed by casual doodles, the kind that accompany
lecture notes, decorate grocery lists, or are scribbled
on paper napkins ( FIG. 11.6   ). Psychologist Robert
Burns has researched the meanings of doodles only to
fi nd that they are another form of art therapy. Doodles
are nonverbal messages that surface from the unconscious
mind, each doodle or mark important in its own
right. Often, doodles are symbols of thoughts, feelings,
and perceptions in visual form. Although the understanding
of “doodling” is in its infancy, several observations
have been made by Burns (Jaret, 1991). Aggression
is often expressed in dark, heavy, jagged lines with arrows
or points. Horizontal lines convey inner peace. Happiness
is typically represented by soft, curvy lines. Burns discovered
that men typically draw geometric shapes—squares,
triangles, circles—whereas women tend to sketch faces.
Like the conscious effort to draw a graphic representa-
Chapter 11
250
Doodles may not seem like a form
of therapy, but they, too, reveal
what cannot be expressed verbally.
FIGURE 11.6
tion of our feelings, unconscious doodling also conveys
important messages about the internal landscape.
Steps to Initiate Art Therapy
The beauty of art therapy is that anyone can participate
and its signifi cant therapeutic effect benefi ts not only
cancer patients but anyone experiencing the signs and
symptoms of perceived stress. In this case, as with other
coping and relaxation techniques, the word therapy does
not refl ect weakness or needing help. Rather, art therapy
serves to augment understanding of the personal
awareness and resolution process. Art therapy appears
to trigger a progression of two responses. The fi rst is a
cathartic effect, whereby you can release pent-up emotions
and thoughts from your mind onto paper (or clay).
The second is a greater sense of personal awareness
based on an objective look at or interpretation of the
artwork—that is, the message it suggests or implies.
This interpretation or awareness is often a communication
from the unconscious mind regarding less-thanobvious
symbolic images. Although an interpretation
can be helpful in the self-awareness process, without
some prior knowledge or assistance, meaning could also
be overlooked, mistaken, or misconstrued. Thus, there
are several factors to consider to ensure the effectiveness
of this technique, including artistic roadblocks, materials,
illustrative themes, and interpretation.
Artistic Roadblocks
The most common reaction people have to art therapy is,
“I can’t draw!” The truth is, everyone can draw, in a way
Expressive Art Therapy
251
specifi c to their own talents and abilities. A case in point
is Irishman Christie Brown. A paraplegic without use of
his hands because of cerebral palsy, he painted with his
left foot. Many people are hesitant to draw out of embarrassment.
But in art therapy it doesn’t matter what your
abilities are. Whether your creative talents are best
described as third-grade stick fi gures or are undisputed
re-creations of Old Masters, it makes no difference.
Abstract images, fi ne-detailed sketches, simple lines, colors,
and shapes are all equally important. Art therapy is
noncompetitive. There is no right or wrong. With this
obstacle out of the way, you’re ready to give it a try.
This illustration was drawn by a
student who saw herself as having
high self-esteem. The fi sh represents beauty and
freedom. The color orange represents a major life
change (the artist was a graduating senior) and the
green plant (stability) with four leaves represented
four job offers (all of which she received).
FIGURE 11.7
This illustration was drawn by a
student who chose the theme in
which one closes one’s eyes, draws a line, and then
opens the eyes and turns the paper around slowly
until an image comes to mind. In this case the student
completed the illustration by drawing a Santa Fe
fresco in the likeness of the Virgin Mary.
FIGURE 11.8
Artistic roadblocks: The perceived inability to
express oneself though creative expression (often
based on fear).
Materials
Opinions vary greatly on the choice of medium recommended
for art therapy. The one factor agreed upon is
that there should be a wide assortment of colors to allow
full expression. Art therapists generally agree that the
best medium is colored pastels, as they are the easiest to
work with for both broad strokes and fi ne lines. Siegel,
on the other hand, advocates crayons. Crayons not only
come in all colors of the rainbow, says Siegel, but they
bring out the child in the artist, a characteristic that promotes
familiar receptivity to this medium. While pastels
and crayons are preferred, colored pencils can also be
used. Virshup advocates the availability of all media,
including string dipped in paint and dragged across the
paper. The purpose behind all these media is to have as
wide a variety of colors as possible, so pen and pencil are
not advocated but in a pinch will suffi ce. Finger paints
have been used with children, and modeling clay has also
been shown to be effective for this technique. Paper selection
is a less problematic decision. Art therapists highly
recommend the economical blank newsprint (18" × 24");
Siegel suggests a white sheet of paper; however, any type
of paper in most any size will suffi ce. Once you have these
materials, all you need is an idea and some inspiration to
put pastel or crayon in your hand and draw.
Illustrative Themes
When art therapy is used as a coping technique to deal
with stress, there is a host of themes and concepts providing
inspiration to choose from. One approach is just
to start drawing (anything) until you achieve some level
of comfort with this technique. Other themes are more
specifi c to events, feelings, or situations that words seem
inadequate to describe. I have tried (with much success)
the following themes in my classes:
1. Art therapy images. Introductory art therapy sessions
are typically initiated with two or three
themes such as:
a. Draw something that represents you. This could
be a symbol of yourself, a picture of something
you identify yourself with, such as your profession,
family, hobbies, home, or something
that gives you inner strength.
b. Draw two fantasy animals. Draw whichever
two animals come to mind, even creations of
animals that do not exist on the planet. Then,
describe the animals you have drawn in a few
words (approximately three adjectives) on the
Chapter 11
252
A
B
(A) This picture was drawn by
a student who was grieving the
loss of her dear friend, a fellow student who was
murdered at Columbine High School. The tears down
her cheek have formed a pool of blue-green water.
Her black hair is a symbol of grief, yet the sunshine
is working its way to warm her heart. (B) “This is
how I feel when I am angry—I often feel full of
rage, but feel like my mouth is a closed zipper, and
I cannot express my feelings. The dress represents
my family and friends expecting me to act feminine
instead of showing my rage. The beer cans tell the
rest of the story.”
FIGURE 11.9
back of the paper (from Virshup’s art therapy
workshop).
c. Close your eyes and draw a line on the paper. Make
the line any shape—straight, curved, jagged,
fuzzy, or thin, whatever strikes your fancy, but
keep your eyes closed while you draw. Next,
open your eyes and take a look at what you see.
You can rotate the paper around slowly until
something strikes the fancy of your creative
eye. Then, complete the drawing. Make something
out of the line you drew. Give the line
meaning. Do with it whatever comes to mind.
2. Healing images. Although art therapy has been
used extensively with cancer patients, many other
diseases and symptoms can be represented on
paper. The following themes are ideas to enhance
positive internal image, body awareness, and
mental imagery.
a. Draw yourself. Sketch an image of yourself in
a state of perfect health.
b. Draw a picture of a part of your body you feel
needs special attention. Draw an area that you
feel is perhaps a target organ of stress, one that
shows signs of excessive wear and tear, or a
part of your body that does not feel completely
whole—for example, a headache, sore back,
stomach cramps, clenched teeth. On another
sheet of paper (or the back side), draw an image
of this same body region fully healed. Use your
imagination to restore this image to health
through metaphor (e.g., a sock completely
darned to represent a healed stomach ulcer).
3. Mental images. Art therapy can be a vehicle for
mental imagery also. The images drawn provoke
the mind to wander. For example:
a. Draw a peaceful image. Draw an image that
makes you feel relaxed just by thinking about
it. It can be a place you have been to that you
would like to return to, if only on paper. It can
also be a place you have never been to but have
always wanted to go.
b. Draw how you feel right now. What emotion(s)
are you feeling now? Anger, fear, guilt, worry,
love, joy, peace? What does your anger look
like to you? How would you illustrate your
feelings of love? Try to visualize your emotions
on paper.
c. Draw a dream image. Try to include whatever
fragments of a particular dream you can recall.
Include the use of colors.
Interpretations
Interpretations are the hardest component of art therapy.
They are diffi cult because there is wide latitude
for impressions and understanding the fi gures, colors,
shapes, and sizes that have made their way onto paper.
Jung once said that the most important factor in dream
analysis is the patient’s impressions because dreams are
the creation of the dreamer. Drawings and sketches are
no different when it comes to interpretation. As a
cathartic experience, interpretations of drawings are
secondary to simply getting feelings down on paper.
Art therapists, and even psychologists who now use art
therapy in their practices, engage in a fair amount of
training to understand the commonalities, expressions
of colors, and a host of other components of drawings
(www.arttherapy.org). When inter preting the colors
you have chosen, be careful to keep in mind both the
context of the illustration and mood you were in when
you drew the picture. For example, black is often used
to represent death or grief, but for an African American,
the color may also symbolize pride.
Interpretation is the search for understanding as the
unconscious mind communicates to the conscious mind
Expressive Art Therapy
253
This illustration was drawn by
an athlete who selected the
theme, Draw how you feel when you are stressed
(anger or fear). Titling her picture “Depression,”
she described the spiral around her body as a black
cloud of despair. The red and yellow colors show
signs of hope. Notice the similarity of this image to
the depiction of the human energy fi eld in Chapter 3
(Figure 3.4). (©T. Panagopolus)
FIGURE 11.10
Chapter 11
254
thoughts and feelings best described through a visual
medium. In all art therapy sessions, patients are encouraged
to explain their drawings to members of their
group. Members, in turn, ask questions that may aid the
artist in understanding his or her drawing. If done
alone, a written description of the work helps with this
process. But caution should be used when trying to
interpret the meaning of your own artwork. First, go
for the obvious. In the words of Freud, “Sometimes a
cigar is just a cigar.”
Best Application of Art Therapy
Art is a nonverbal expression of one’s thoughts and feelings—
expression that is not only necessary but therapeutic
as well. There are many circumstances, in times
of both ecstasy and torment, in which words do not
adequately describe the full extent of our emotions.
These are the times to employ art therapy. Remember
that emotional well-being is defi ned as the ability to feel
and positively express the full range of human emotions.
Everyone, regardless of their levels of stress or
chaotic life situations, can benefi t from the use and practice
of art therapy. As crazy as it may sound, keeping a
box of crayons or colored pencils in your desk drawer is
as important as having an address book or weekly planner.
If you don’t have art supplies, it might be a good
idea to obtain them. And remember, pictures don’t have
to be masterpieces. They can start off as doodles.
  Art as a means of self-expression dates back to antiquity.
Art therapy has its roots in Freudian and
Jungian psychology, where illustrations were used
to aid in understanding unconscious thoughts.
  In 1969, the American Art Therapy Association was
established to educate and certify people in the skills
of art therapy. Art therapy has since been introduced
into a variety of settings, including counseling centers,
hospitals, and addiction treatment centers, as
well as nontraditional settings such as corporate
wellness centers. It has proved an effective coping
technique for all types of people to get in touch with
their emotions in a nonverbal way.
  Art therapy is described as the creative use of art
to provide for nonverbal expression and communication
through which to foster self-awareness and
personal growth.
  Every stroke, every color, every detail has some relevant
meaning at the unconscious level.
  There are varying opinions on the use of materials
for art therapy, meaning that there is no preferred
method. Crayons, pastels, colored pencils, fi nger
paint, and clay are all possibilities. Art therapists
do suggest that a wide variety of colors be available.
Colors provide specifi c meaning to thoughts and
unconscious messages.
  Art therapists offer a series of themes to explore in
this type of nonverbal communication, including a
picture of yourself, a fantasy animal, and a house
with trees.
1. Explain how art therapy is used as an effective
coping technique.
2. What archetypal meanings do colors represent or
symbolize in art therapy?
3. List several steps that help promote art therapy as
a coping technique.
SUMMARY
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
Expressive Art Therapy
255
Humor Therapy
(Comic Relief )
A smile is
the shortest
distance
between
two people.
—Victor Borge
Chapter 12
In 1964, a man admitted himself to a hospital for severe pain throughout his entire body.
After a series of tests, he was diagnosed with a rare rheumatoid disease called ankylosing
spondylitis, a progressive deterioration of the body’s connective tissue. Chances
for recovery were predicted to be roughly one in fi ve hundred; the disease was quite
Humor Therapy (Comic Relief)
259
advanced. Like most people, Norman Cousins decided
to learn all he could about the etiology of his disease.
He soon discovered that there is a strong correlation between
stress, particularly negative perceptions and emotions,
and his specifi c disease. So, the question occurred
to him: If negative emotions such as guilt, worry, and
anxiety are thought to be related to, and perhaps even
to promote, disease, is it possible for positive emotions to
maintain health, or even restore one’s health? He came
to the conclusion that to increase his chances of recovery,
he had to assume responsibility for his treatment. And
that he did. He had nothing to lose.
With a defi ant determination to recover and the support
of his personal physician, Cousins checked out of
the hospital and into a nearby hotel. He acquired copies
of humorous movies and TV shows, including those of
Laurel and Hardy and the Marx Brothers. One of his
friends, Alan Funt, even sent some classic clips from his
hit TV show Candid Camera. Cousins later wrote in his
now-famous book Anatomy of an Illness that “ten minutes
of laughter allowed two hours of pain-free sleep.”
After a time, he checked out of the hotel and went
home; his disease had gone into remission. On the advice
of his doctor, Cousins (1978) wrote up his story as a case
history for the New England Journal of Medicine.
Although he attributed his successful healing process to
several factors, including large doses of vitamin C, the
interpretation by those who read the article was that
Cousins literally laughed himself back to health.
Norman Cousins’s story is now just one of many supporting
the idea that positive emotions do indeed have
healing effects on health. However, it was this single
case study of comic relief, perhaps more than any other,
that paved the road to a whole new fi eld of study called
psycho neuroimmunology (PNI), and Cousins will
always be remembered for his generous contribution to
it. What has been learned since his hospital discharge is
that positive emotions play an incredible role in maintaining
the health of the human body. Humor therapy,
or comic relief, is the use of humor to promote wellbeing
through positive thoughts, attitudes, and emotions
by counter balancing the deleterious effects of
negative thoughts, perceptions, and emotions on one’s
health. Humor as a coping technique is not a panacea
for all ills, but it does provide benefi ts in a bad situation,
whether in a hospital bed or outside a locked car, with
your keys still in the ignition. Upon the death of legendary
comic Bob Hope, who lived to be 100, his daughter,
interviewed on Larry King Live, noted that comedians
and musical composers tend to live longer than most,
most likely because of having a positive attitude.
Historical Perspective
Humor is a human magnet: It attracts all ears and
minds. And laughter is a universal language, breaking
through cultural barriers when words cannot. Cousins
certainly was not the fi rst person to use humor as a coping
technique. Comic relief has been pondered since
men and women fi rst tickled their funny bones. The
ancient Greeks held humor as a virtue. The philosopher
Plato, for instance, believed humor nurtured the soul,
and he advocated its use as a healing practice (Shelley,
2003). From the ancient Greeks came the formulas for
theater, including comedy, still used today. And as far
back as Old Testament times, people in the Middle East
believed “A merry heart doeth good like a medicine,
but a broken spirit drieth the bones” (Proverbs 17:22).
In fact, humor as a “healing medicine” can be found at
the root of virtually every culture on the globe, from the
earliest practices of the native peoples of Africa to those
of the Americas. It seems that humor and the viruses it
helps to fi ght are equally contagious.
The word humor comes from a Latin word of the same
spelling that means “fl uid” or “moisture.” According to
the physiology of the medieval period in Europe (the age
of alchemy and potions), there were four basic body fl uids,
with each “humor” associated with a specifi c mood or
general disposition. Choler, the yellow bile produced by
the gallbladder, allegedly made one melancholy and
depressed. Similarly, black bile, produced by the kidneys
or spleen, was responsible for anger and hostility. A
happy, cheerful spirit was associated with blood; while
phlegm, produced by the respiratory system, was the reason
behind apathy and sluggishness. If any one humor
was produced in excess, it was thought to change mood,
Norman Cousins (1915–1990): An author of
the classic book Anatomy of an Illness (1976),
he used humor to help heal himself from a serious
disease and brought the importance of humor
to the national consciousness in terms of mindbody-
spirit healing, paving the way for the fi eld of
psychoneuroimmunology.
Humor: A perception of something funny or comical;
not a mood, but a perception that can trigger a
feeling or mood of joy and happiness.
which put the individual at risk of social ridicule—ergo,
the fi rst comedians. If all body fl uids were balanced,
however, a person was said to be “in good humor.” Note,
too, that the practice of blood letting, or draining the body
of fl uids to relieve symptoms and causes of these ailments,
was a common practice in the United States as well as
Europe until 1850. Sad to say, many a person died from
melancholy, and a career as a physician was not looked
upon with favor as it is today.
Intrigued with the use of humor as a healing agent,
Dr. Raymond Moody surveyed several history books in
1978 to discover the following. In the year 1260, a progressive
French physician, Henri de Moundeville, saw
the important relationship between positive emotions
and sound health, and made a practice of allowing family
and friends to cheer and joke with their sick relatives.
He wrote, “Let the surgeon take care to regulate
the whole regimen of the patient’s life for joy and happiness.”
European monarchs also saw the importance of
laughter, and often employed court jesters (those guys
with funny shoes) to add mirth to their castle courts.
Perhaps the most renowned court jester was Richard
Tarlton, who was credited with keeping British Queen
Elizabeth I (1533–1603) in better health than did her
team of physicians.
But laughter has not always been looked upon with
favor. Europeans in the Middle Ages and Puritans on
the eastern shores of North America, among others,
perceived laughter to be the work of the devil. People
caught laughing out loud were often denounced as
witches or believed to be possessed by Satan. The expression
of humor was considered a sin in many Christian
denominations. Other comments from those days about
laughter (Moody, 1978):
Laughter on any occasion is immoral and indecent.
Laughter obscures truth, hardens the heart, and stupefi
es understanding.
A man of parts of fashion is therefore only seen to
smile, but never heard to laugh.
—Lord Chesterfi eld, 1748
And if you look at the portraits of European nobility
commissioned over a period of several hundred years,
you are hard-pressed to fi nd anyone smiling (except
perhaps the Mona Lisa).
The words “say cheese” were not coined for use with the
fi rst camera in the nineteenth century, either; people were
afraid of being caught sinning in public ( FIG. 12.1   ).
In fact, according to Allen Klein (1989), it was not until
the twentieth century that people would risk a smile in a
photograph.
Social norms are often infl uenced by fi gures of authority,
so humor scholars have turned to the American
presidency, a high-stress job, to observe the use of humor
in the Oval Offi ce. Lincoln was reported to use humorous
stories in his political speeches and even read jokes
to his cabinet during the Civil War period. Jimmy
Carter once said to reporters at a press-conference dinner,
“I’m not going to say anything important, so you
can put your crayons away.” When Ronald Reagan, a
politician known for his sense of humor, was brought to
George Washington University Medical Center hospital
after the assassination attempt on his life, he turned
to the assembled medical team and said, “I hope you’re
all Republicans.” And when Dan Quayle’s father said
that his son studied only “booze and broads” in college,
presidential candidate George H. W. Bush was heard
Chapter 12
260
Because laughing and smiling
were thought to be a sin at the
turn of the last century, no one did so in front of a
camera for fear of being blackmailed with the proof.
FIGURE 12.1
to reply, “Not many students had a double major.”
President Clinton’s jokes we cannot print in this book.
And George W. Bush readily admits that it takes him
2 hours to watch 60 Minutes. It appears that humor helps
in the stressful role as president, too.
Times have changed since the days of Victorian prudery.
With the help of the American and European
entertainment industries, from vaudeville to Hollywood
to television, the use of humor has gained wide acceptance
throughout the world as a prominent factor in
enhancing positive emotions. Slow to join this opinion
until it had undisputable proof, the medical community
now also accepts humor as a viable technique for health
promotion and wellness. And it is Norman Cousins we
have to thank for validating the use of humor as an
authentic therapy in its own right.
Humor and comic relief are no less important now than
when Cousins fi rst checked into the hospital decades
ago. Some would say that given the state of the world
today, the need for comic relief is at an all-time high.
Perhaps for this reason, a recent study was conducted in
England in 2002 to determine the funniest joke—ever!
A multitude of submissions were sent via email from
around the world and screened by a group of “experts.”
The following joke was selected as one of the winners:
Famed fi ctional detective Sherlock Holmes and his
gruff assistant Dr. Watson pitch their tent while on a
camping trip. In the middle of the night, Holmes
nudges Watson to wake him up.
Holmes: Watson, look up at the stars and tell me what
you deduce.
Watson: I see millions of stars. And if there are millions
of stars, even if a few of those have planets, it is
quite likely there are some planets like earth. And if
there are a few planets like earth, then indeed, there
might be intelligent life, much like our own, Sir.
Holmes: Watson, you idiot, someone stole the tent!
Types and Senses of Humor
For all the philosophical studies on the topic of humor—
and there have been many—there has yet to be consensus
on what humor really is. It encompasses so many
facets and seems so profoundly complex that it has
proved quite diffi cult to defi ne succinctly. Most experts
agree that humor is not itself a positive emotion, but
that it can elicit positive emotions, including happiness,
joy, love, faith, hope, and willpower. Humor is not a
behavior, although it can produce actions (laughter and
smiling) that are specifi c to its nature. Humor is best
described as a perception, for as we all know and have
experienced, what one person fi nds funny someone else
does not. The following are two defi nitions to illustrate
this elusive perception (McGhee, 1979):
1. Humor is “the mental experience of discovering
and appreciating ludicrous or absurd ideas,
events, or situations that bring pleasure or enjoyment
to the individual.”
2. Humor is “the quality of being funny or appreciating
funny thoughts or acts of behavior; the ability
to perceive/enjoy what is funny or comical, a
state of mind, feeling, or mood.”
It appears from the defi nitions that humor has two fundamental
aspects. Simply stated, these are give and take.
First, humor can be absorbed like a sponge, or experienced
by internalizing this perception cognitively.
Second, humor can be expressed externally through an
action in an effort to share it with others. It is accepted
that everyone has a sense of humor, although from your
personal experience, you may think you have proof to
deny this statement. Among those who have studied
humor, McGhee (1979) cites three factors that must be
present for humor to exist:
1. Sources that act as potential stimuli (e.g., a pie
thrown in someone’s face)
2. A cognitive and intellectual activity involved with
the perception and evaluation of these sources
(perceiving a faceful of whipped cream to be
amusing)
3. Behavioral responses that are the expressions of
humor (i.e., smiling or laughing)
Types of Humor
Perhaps the reason humor has been so diffi cult to defi ne
is that there are so many shades of it that can be internalized
or expressed. Furthermore, types of humor overlap
and integrate with each other so that it is hard to separate
them out sometimes. While there are several theories of
how humor can be categorized, I list them here in a particular
order—parody fi rst and sarcasm last—according
to their effi cacy at coping with stress. Everything between
parody and sarcasm is fairly equal, and powerful in its
own way, as either a subtle means to dissolve anger and
fear, or to distract attention away from stress long enough
for the body to return to homeostasis.
Humor Therapy (Comic Relief)
261
1. Parody. Parody is a work of humor that
closely imitates something, or someone,
for comical effect. Parody is typically a
verbal or physical expression of humor
bringing imperfections to light. This
type of humor is considered to be one of
the best, if not the best, types of humor to
deal with stress, as long as it doesn’t sacrifi
ce self-esteem. Exaggera ting behaviors
and personality traits are examples.
Good-natured parody, however, should
not be mistaken for self-criticism expressed
as an appeal for sympathy. When
individuals can begin to parody and
laugh at their own shortcomings, in their
own minds, it will have the wonderful
effect of reducing perceptions of stress.
Celebrity “roasts” are pro bably the bestknown
parodies. The Onion, a national
college paper, and the television show
The Offi ce are also prime examples of
parody.
2. Satire. Although satire and parody
have many commonalities, satire is
most often thought of as a written or
dramatic expression of personal and
social fl aws. In the use of satire, many
personal, political, and cultural quirks
are described and exaggerated for
humorous effect. America’s most celebrated
humorists, Art Buchwald,
Erma Bombeck, Tom Robbins, P. J.
O’Rourke, Molly Ivins, and Dave
Barry, are well known for their styles
of satire. Without question, Steven
Colbert (The Colbert Report) is the
epitome of a satirical right-wing conservative
newscaster. Saturday Night Live skits are prime
examples of dramatic satire, as are the movies The
Princess Bride and Shrek, both satires (and perhaps
parodies) of classic fairy tales. And, of course,
who could forget The Simpsons?
Chapter 12
262
3. Slapstick comedy. In the early days of American
vaudeville, many actors used physical farce to generate
laughs ( FIG. 12.2   ). Slipping on a banana
peel, getting a pie in the face, or reeling from a slap
on the cheek was sure to get a rise out of the audience.
While banana peels and cream pies were real,
face slaps were faked. Behind the curtain stood a
person making the sound effects. Originating in
the French theater, the slap stick was a piece of
leather nailed to a fl at board. At the appropriate
moment on stage, use of the slap stick would also
produce laughs. The Marx Brothers, Laurel and
Hardy, Abbott and Costello, the Three Stooges,
Parody: A style of humor where something or someone
is made fun of. Self-parody is thought to be the
best type of humor to reduce stress.
Satire: A written or dramatic form of parody. Examples
include the works of George Carlin and the
movie Shrek.
Saturday Night Live hits upon all types of
humor but is perhaps best known for its satirical
skits (Jeopardy). Comedians Billy Crystal, Whoopi Goldberg,
and Robin Williams (Comic Relief Benefi t) also employ nearly
every type of humor from self-parody, irony, and quick wit to
slapstick and black humor.
FIGURE 12.2
and Lucille Ball all had their professional roots in
American vaudeville. Steve Carrell, Jim Carrey,
and Steve Martin are holding the slapstick mantle
today. Scholars note that slapstick comedy is an
aggression-based humor through which audience
members can release latent anger in a cathartic
way (laughing) by watching someone else give and
receive physical, yet harmless, blows.
4. Absurd/nonsense humor. Absurd or nonsense humor
is described as two or more concepts that unite to
result in a stupid, ludicrous, or ridiculous perception.
The best example of this style of humor is The
Onion newspaper. Cartoonist Gary Larson’s cartoon
strip The Far Side also qualifi es. Cows driving
cars, sharks wearing horn-rimmed glasses, and
cheetahs using vending machines on the Serengeti
plain are all absurd. Dan Piraro’s Bizarro strip
conveys the same humor ( FIG. 12.4   ). Steven
Wright is to stand-up comedy as Gary Larson and
Piraro are to cartoons, with a brand of absurd
humor that has to be heard to be believed. Absurd
or nonsense humor is also thought to be a good
brand of humor to reduce stress because it acts as a
diversion from the inundation of daily stressors.
Take Monty Python, for example. Both styles put
Humor Therapy (Comic Relief)
263
a gentle chaos back into the order of everyday
thinking, making one realize that life shouldn’t be
taken too seriously.
5. The double entendre. The double entendre is a type
of wordplay, where the expression has two meanings
(usually of a sexual nature). James Bond movies
are fi lled with these verbal gags. Bumper
stickers are notorious for these wordplays as well.
Even Disney cartoons are written at two levels—
for both kids and parents—where each laughs, but
for what appears to be different reasons. Double
entendres abound in everything from cartoons to
political commentaries on Comedy Central. For
example, Chris Rock notes that in determining
legislation about the legalization of marijuana,
both houses of Congress went into a joint session.
Here is another example, in honor of Earth Day
2004: Clean up the Earth, it’s not Uranus!
6. Black humor. Black humor is not a type of ethnic
humor as some people are led to believe. Black, or
“gallows,” humor is based on the fear of death. It is
sometimes described as a “fl irtatious brush with
death.” Death is a common fear among human
(©John McPherson. Reprinted
with permission of Universal Press
Syndicate. All rights reserved.)
FIGURE 12.3
(©Dan Piraro. Reprinted with
special permission of King Features
Syndicate.)
FIGURE 12.4
Slapstick: Originating from vaudeville, a physical
farce such as getting a pie thrown in the face or
slipping on a banana peel.
Absurd or nonsense humor: This type of humor
is best exemplifi ed by the works of Gary Larson’s
The Far Side. The comedian Steven Wright is also a
prime example.
Double entendre: A joke that has two meanings.
Black humor: Humor about death and dying;
thought to decrease fear of death.
beings, and one way the human mind has devised
to deal with this fear is to poke fun at it, attempting
to become more comfortable with the concept, if
only momentarily. Typically, during national tragedies,
black-humor jokes surface as a way to cope
with the gruesome reality of death, as was the case
when jokes circulated immediately after the
Columbia space shuttle explosion in 2003. Some of
the best examples of black humor can be found in
fi lms and videos like the infamous Harold and
Maude and the more recent Bad Santa and Little
Miss Sunshine. Much of the comic wit used in the
television series M*A*S*H and Scrubs expressed
various shades of black humor. Cartoonists, including
Gary Larson, also make light of this phenomenon
in their illustrations.
The dead as well as the living seem to have the
last laugh, as expressed in the last words of
American humorist Dorothy Parker (etched on
her tombstone), “Pardon my dust.” In a survey of
gravestone epitaphs, Louis Schafer (1990) discovered
that cemeteries are not devoid of tongue-incheek
black humor either, as illustrated in the
following examples:
John Strange
Here lies an honest lawyer.
This is Strange.
Here lieth the body of Martha Dias
Always noisy, not very pious,
Who lived to the age of three score and ten
And gave to worms what she refused to men.
Here lies John Bun, He was killed by a gun,
His name is not Bun, but Wood,
But Wood would not rhyme with gun, but Bun
would.
William Reese
This is what I expected, but not so soon.
Here lies the body of Susan Louder,
who died while drinking a seltzer powder.
Now she’s gone to her heavenly rest,
She should have waited till it effervesced.
7. Irony. Irony is described as two concepts or events,
which when paired together, come to mean or
expose the opposite of the expected outcome (e.g.,
“Honk if you love peace and quiet”). Life is full of
ironies: receiving a surprise check for one hundred
dollars in the mail only to fi nd a credit card bill for
one hundred dollars the same day. Bumper stickers,
such as “My other car is a broom,” often use
irony. Irony can also be seen in everyday occurrences
such as buying four candy bars—and a Diet
Coke. Oxymorons (two opposite concepts) provide
yet another type of irony. Ex am ples are military
intelligence, honest politicians, and jumbo shrimp.
One of the best examples of irony I have ever heard,
though, went like this (Klein, 1989): Charlie
Chaplin once entered a Charlie Chaplin Lookalike
Contest, and won third prize! Many stand-up
comics, including David Letterman, Jay Leno,
George Lopez, Sarah Silverman, Robin Williams,
and Billy Crystal, use this type of humor in their
acts, and playwright Neil Simon uses ironic twists
in his fi lms and Broadway plays. Native American
humor includes a number of humor styles, particularly
irony, including the works of Sherman Alexie,
Gary Farmer, and Chris Eyre.
8. Dry humor, quick wit, and puns. Dry humor can be
described as clever, esoteric wit. It often involves
double entendres, words with more than one meaning
or connotation (e.g., a Jewish zydeco band
called So How’s Bayou), frequently with sexual
innuendo. Mark Twain, Will Rogers, Groucho
Marx, Winston Churchill, the cast of Britain’s
Monty Python’s Flying Circus, and, more recently,
Garrison Keillor of Prairie Home Companion are
fi ne examples of creators of esoteric wit. Click and
Clack of NPR’s “Car Talk” fame are examples of
quick-witted humor, as is comedian George
Carlin. Puns, or plays on words, also fall into this
category. It has often been said that puns are the
Chapter 12
264
Irony: A type of humor where the opposite from
what was originally expected occurs.
Dry humor: Often found in storytelling (e.g.,
Garrison Kellor, Mark Twain), where the humor is
subtle and clever.
Quick-witted humor: A style of humor that is based
on quick wit without using sarcasm. Quick-witted
humor often involves clever wording or phrasing
that catches you off guard and leaves you impressed.
Examples include the works of Mark Twain and
NPR’s “Car Talk” radio show.
Puns: A type of wordplay that may leave people
sighing rather than laughing.
lowest form of humor because, unlike cle ver wit,
they border on the silly or inane. Actually, puns
have no malicious intent and therefore are not the
lowest form of humor. Some examples of puns
follow:
  A pessimist’s blood type is always B-negative.
  I fi red my masseuse today. She just rubbed me
the wrong way.
  A Freudian slip is when you say one thing but
mean your mother.
  I used to work in a blanket factory, but it folded.
You may fi nd it takes effort to laugh at puns,
however, whereas other types of humor provoke
laughter more spontaneously. Here’s one: You
can pick your friends and you can pick your nose,
but you cannot pick your friend’s nose.
9. Bathroom humor. If you have seen American Pie,
American Wedding, Dumb and Dumber, South Park,
or There’s Something about Mary (movies that
would make Freud blush), then you know what
bathroom humor is. If you haven’t, the words vulgar,
ruthless, crude, and irreverent come close to
describing the topics of every body function imaginable
chosen for cheap (and in some cases, hilarious)
laughs. In 2006, the movie Borat brought the
concept of bathroom humor to an all-time low (or
high, depending on your taste).
10. Sarcasm. The word sarcasm means “to tear fl esh,”
and if you have ever borne the brunt of sarcasm,
then you know all too well that this is a fi gurative
yet accurate description. Although sarcasm may
share elements with clever wit, it reveals latent
anger (see Chapter 4). It is an attempt to get verbal
revenge. Sarcasm is perceived by its users to
be a socially acceptable way to express hostile feelings
through words rather than physical aggression,
but words can hurt as much, if not more,
than physical abuse, and the memory of it far
exceeds that of physical pain. A sarcastic remark
is typically followed by the punch line, “I’m just
kidding,” to take the sharp edge off the potential
pain infl icted. Sarcasm is the lowest form of
humor. Although sarcastic remarks may seem
funny, they actually induce stress rather than
relieve it in the person toward whom they are
aimed. For this reason, sarcasm is not advocated
as a vehicle for expressing humor. Almost everyone
employs it to some extent, but its use should
be minimized if not altogether abandoned.
Although types of humor have been compartmentalized
into various categories here, for the most part, in
practice they mix and blend together to form a score of
permutations. Examples would be a sarcastic joke about
death, or a parody of slapstick. It is equally diffi cult to
neatly categorize senses of humor, or why individuals
laugh at what they do.
Senses of Humor
Just as there is more than one type of humor, experts of
humor research have identifi ed several senses of humor.
Senses of humor appear to be a function of one’s upbringing
and collective environments. Quite possibly, each
individual has the makings for all the senses of humor,
but one type tends to dominate in each personality. For
this reason, it is complicated to give general advice on
ways to improve one’s sense of humor. In his book Laugh
after Laugh, Dr. Raymond Moody identifi es four categories
describing most people’s senses of humor:
1. Conventional. In the conventional sense of humor,
two or more people fi nd common ground by
sharing a similar humorous perception and
laughing at the same thing. Laughter occurs with
someone, not at someone. There is a mutual
appreciation for things that appear universally
funny. Johnny Carson’s sidekick, Ed McMahon,
who laughed at nearly everything, might be an
example of the conventional sense of humor.
2. Life of the party. While some people soak up
humor ous episodes like a sponge, others have the
ability to provide laughable moments for the
Humor Therapy (Comic Relief)
265
Bathroom humor: A form of humor often described
as vulgar, crude, and tasteless, it derives its name
from the use of various bodily functions known to
occur in the bathroom.
Sarcasm: Thought to be the lowest form of humor,
the word sarcasm means to tear fl esh. Because sarcasm
is a latent form of anger, it promotes rather
than reduces stress.
Senses of humor: A frame of mind as part of one’s
personality in how one uses humor and laughter in
one’s life.
Conventional sense of humor: A term to describe
more than one person laughing at the same thing,
all agreeing to its humor.
amusement of everyone else. People with life-ofthe-
party sense of humor are the ones who wear
the lamp shades at parties, recite numerous jokes
and always remember the punch lines, and can tell
any story and make it funny. These people love an
audience and may have played the role of class
clown in school in younger days. They are spontaneous,
creative, and quick-witted. They have the
ability to make everyone laugh, or at least smile.
This is the kind of person you want to call up when
you’re feeling down and need to lift your spirits.
Someone who pulls up alongside you at a red light,
rolls down the window, and asks if you have any
Grey Poupon mustard has this sense of humor.
3. Creative. The creative sense of humor is best
observed in those whose professional career is joke
writing. They are extremely quick-witted, very
imaginative, and creative. These are people who
can fi nd humor in just about anything. People with
the creative sense of humor frequently laugh to
themselves, and if you ask them, “What’s so
funny?” they might tell you, or they might just say,
“It was nothing.” They are easily entertained.
Although creative in their joke making, they often
prefer to let someone else make the delivery. Anonymous
graffi tists also fall into this category.
4. Good sport. A good-sport sense of humor is demonstrated
by those who can laugh at their own
foibles and mistakes and enjoy being human.
These people know how to employ self-parody
and make good use of it. With this style, laughter
is used to cope with personal imperfections rather
than rationalize pitfalls. These people can take a
practical joke without calling a lawyer afterward.
In the sense of good sportsmanship, the walls of
the ego are low if not completely dissolved after a
practical joke.
Theories of Humor
For ages, perhaps longer, humankind has tried to understand
just what it is that makes somebody laugh. As
might be expected, no one answer appeared. To date,
there are four major theories to explain the lighter side of
human nature, as described by humor scholars Ziv (1984),
Goldstein and McGhee (1972), and Bonham (1988). First,
according to Steve Allen, Jr. (1990), “Humor is a physical
release, one of four, actually. These include crying, yawning,
orgasm, and laughter. You can do them in succession,
just get the order right.” Where appropriate, I have
included anonymously credited jokes from Novak and
Waldok’s Big Book of American Humor (1990) to illustrate
these theories.
Superiority Theory
Superiority theory, thought to be originated by Plato during
the fourth century b.c., is the oldest theory attempting
to explain people’s affi nity for the ridiculous. When
laughter occurs at the expense of someone else, as in
mockery or ridicule, so that the end result is that the
jokester feels better than the object of ridicule, then the
reason for laughter illustrates superiority theory (Box
12.1). To laugh at someone else’s misfortunes gives slight,
and temporary, comfort to our own condition. Typically,
the greater the dignity of the object—for example,
Chapter 12
266
  Just say NO to negativity!
  Money is the root of all evil.
(For more information, send $20 to me.)
  Never believe generalizations.
  Be different . . . like everybody else.
  Talk is cheap . . . until you hire a lawyer.
  If pro is the opposite of con, what is the opposite
of progress?
  When life hands you gators . . . make Gatorade.
  Vegetarian: American Indian word for “lousy
hunter.”
  Always try to be modest, and be proud of it!
  Warning: Dates on calendar are closer than they
appear.
  Gravity—It’s not just a good idea, it’s the LAW!
  Duck tape is like the Force. There is a light side
and a dark side and it holds the universe together.
  Never knock on Death’s door. Ring the bell and
run, he hates that.
BOX 12.1 Life In The Fast Lane:
American Graffiti
Life-of-the-party sense of humor: The class clown,
the person who gets all the laughs.
Creative sense of humor: This describes a person
who thinks of jokes or funny things, but may be shy
to share them.
Good-sport sense of humor: This describes someone
who can take a practical joke without suing.
Superiority theory: First coined by Plato describing
the reason why people laugh is at other people’s
expense.
President Clinton and his sexual escapades, Queen
Elizabeth picking her nose in public, and President
George W. Bush reading books upside down to preschoolers—
the greater the laugh.
Superiority theory is also said to be the reason for negative
and offensive humor. According to Goldstein and
McGhee (1972), superiority theory explains aggressionbased
humor used to defi ne and maintain ego boundaries.
It is often used to boost or lower self-esteem,
depending on which end of the joke you are on. At the
extreme in this category are sarcasm and ethnic, sexist,
racist, and even blonde jokes.
Incongruity (Surprise) Theory
On Saturday Night Live, parodies of commercials are
part of the format and sometimes only seasoned veterans
can distinguish the real ads from the fake ones. In
one car commercial, to demonstrate how smoothly the
car rode over roads fi lled with potholes from hell, in the
back seat a circumcision was performed on a crying
new born. To the delight (and relief) of the parents, the
operation was a success.
Incongruity theory concerns two unrelated thoughts
joined for a surprisingly comic effect (Box 12.2). Humor
arises because the mind just doesn’t expect the outcome.
As eighteenth-century philosopher Immanuel Kant
once said, “Laughter is the affl iction arising from the
sudden transformation of a strained expectation into
nothing” (Robinson, 1991).
Ziv (1984) maintains that a surprise in the processing of
information can best be described as incongruous, the
juxtaposition of two strikingly different concepts (e.g., a
Chinese mariachi player). Oxymorons fall into this category.
Humor and creativity are lifetime partners in
incongruity theory. Koestler (1964) described this creative
thought process as bisociation, the catalyst of
humor, especially incongruous humor.
There are said to be two types of incongruity: ascending,
or “ah ha,” which produces wonder and awe, and
descending, or “ha ha,” which produces humor.
Thus, the incongruity theory is a cognitive-based theory
necessitating the intellectual processing of information. The
formation of thoughts that do not fi t the mold of pattern
recognition trigger either a light-bulb effect or a smile.
Split-brain research on subjects who suffered cerebral
strokes indicates that humor is most likely a right-brain
function. In a study reported by Vera Robinson (1991),
stroke patients with right-brain damage showed no sign
of amusement at the punch lines of a series of hundreds of
jokes. Incongruity theory suggests that the left brain tries
to analyze the joke’s contents. When the punch line is
revealed, the left brain is stumped and the right brain
picks up the meaning, resulting in a laugh. But as
Confucius said, “He who laughs last didn’t get the joke.”
Release/Relief Theory
Release/relief theory suggests that people laugh because
they need to release nervous energy built up from repressed
Humor Therapy (Comic Relief)
267
A gentleman walks into a bank in New York City and asks
for the loan offi cer. He says he is going to Europe on
business for 2 weeks and needs to borrow $5,000.
The bank offi cer says the bank will need some kind of
security for such a loan. So, the gentleman hands over
the keys to a new Rolls Royce parked on the street in
front of the bank. Everything checks out, and the bank
agrees to accept the car as collateral for the loan. An
employee drives the Rolls into the bank’s underground
garage and parks it there.
Two weeks later, the gentleman returns, repays the
$5,000 and the interest, which comes to $15.41. The
loan offi cer says, “We are very happy to have had your
business, and this transaction has worked out very
nicely, but we are a little puzzled. While you were away,
we checked you out and found that you are a multimillionaire.
What puzzles us is why you would bother to
borrow $5,000.” The gentleman replies, “Where else in
New York can I park my car for 2 weeks for 15 bucks?”
BOX 12.2 Comic Relief
Incongruity theory: A theory that states the reason
we laugh is because when two concepts come
together in our head and they don’t make sense, we
get a chuckle.
Bisociation: The ability to perceive two aspects to
a situation, in this case, resulting in a laugh.
Release/relief theory: Freud’s theory of laughter is
based on his concept that all laughter is the result of
suppressed sexual tension, thus relieving it through
humor.
thoughts. This theory is credited to Freud. In his study of
the psychology of humor, which included works by Mark
Twain, Freud asserted that the act of laughter is a physical
release or expression of sexual and hostile impulses suppressed
by the conscious mind. He believed that the
greater the suppression of these thoughts, the greater the
laughter in response (Box 12.3). Thus, humor, Freud postulated,
is a refl ection of underlying anxieties. Release/
relief theory is applied to taboo humor, those subjects that
are not socially acceptable in mixed company or professional
settings. Freud’s theory attempted to explain the
popularity of these jokes. Taboo subjects that include sexual
references are “dirty jokes,” but jokes can come from
other social taboos such as illegal drugs and questionable
behavior, as shown on the bumper sticker “Cocaine addiction
is God’s way of saying you make too much money.”
Freud believed that humor was a “rare and precious gift,”
and he called it the most advanced defense mechanism.
(By the way, Twain was not impressed with this or many
other of Freud’s theories.)
Divinity Theory
Although recognized intuitively for quite some time,
the newest theory of the humor phenomenon is that it
strengthens the spiritual nature of humanity. The divinity
theory suggests that humor is a gift from God. In his
book Humor: God’s Gift, author Tal Bonham (1988)
supports his theory with a host of anecdotes, from stories
in the Bible to well-researched case studies. The
same theory is espoused by Cal Samra (1986) in his book
The Joyful Christ. Humor, they believe, makes order out
of chaos by dissolving threats (both anger and anxieties)
to the ego ( FIG. 12.5   ). Humor can also reveal the
naked truth about topics people are often unable to
address any other way; in the words of Chaucer, “Many
a truth be told in jest.” Perhaps most important, humor
has an adhesive quality that connects and bonds people
together, if only for the duration of a joke, and connectedness
is a component of spiritual well-being. This theory
is also shared by the Dalai Lama, who advocates
laughing and smiling as means to cleanse the spirit.
Humor, as Bonham explains, is God’s way of telling us
we’re not perfect. Laughter and giggling are natural
responses by children as they explore life. It is ironic
that in a child’s fi rst year, parents are elated when the
baby smiles and giggles; in fact, these behaviors are
strongly encouraged. But as children mature, they are
told to wipe the smile off their faces, act their age, and
stop laughing. A strong message may be received that
the expression of humor isn’t appropriate or appreciated,
to the detriment of their spiritual development.
There is also a connection between clowns and a divine
presence in many cultures spanning the globe. Medicine
men and shamans have dressed in funny outfi ts and acted
in outrageous ways, which has been, and continues to be,
regarded as clownlike in their respective cultures. A similar
concept was adopted in Europe with the introduction
of clowns in circuses as a form of entertainment. With an
Chapter 12
268
Overheard in an airport men’s room—a guy talking
on his cell phone in a bathroom stall: “Listen, I’m
in the middle of some really busy paper work that
can’t wait. I’ll call you back in a bit. Bye!”
BOX 12.3 Comic Relief
The divinity theory of humor
becomes evident in cartoons like
Non-Sequitur. (Non-Sequitur ©Wiley Miller. Distributed
by Universal Press Syndicate. Reprinted with permission.
All rights reserved.)
FIGURE 12.5
Divinity theory: The belief that humor is a gift
from God.
androgynous face mask or make-up that was neither
male nor female, these people held the mystical power to
heal. To this day, clowns still have this appeal and are
used in hospital wards, especially in children’s hospitals
throughout the United States (Miller and Blerkom, 1995).
There is even a story that, years ago, in Sunday services
held for employees of the Barnum and Bailey Circus, the
altar boys were always the circus clowns. Does God have
a sense of humor? Most theologians think (and hope) so.
It is quite possible for some of these theories to blend or
combine together to explain the laughter response. For
example, if the Queen of England were to tell a Polish
joke (which she hasn’t done), it could be interpreted as an
argument for superiority theory. However, laughter
could also arise from the incongruity of this sense of
humor among royalty, or even the release of anxiety from
the perception of ethnic jokes as taboo. Despite the different
theories as to why we laugh, one idea is agreed upon:
Humor helps us cope with the stress of everyday life.
Humor Therapy as a
Coping Technique
In simplest terms, the use of humor is a defense mechanism.
Yet, unlike other conscious or unconscious defense
strategies to protect the ego, such as rationalization and
projection, humor seems to dissolve the walls of the ego
rather than intensify them. Humor is the one defense
mechanism that can increase pleasure and reduce pain
at the same moment; it gives two effects for the price of
one. Theorists agree that humor is an adaptive coping
mechanism liberating the ego. A 1978 article in Psycho
logy Today asserted that the average person laughs
about fi fteen times per day. Although this study has
been updated, one might infer, given the state of the
world today, that the quota of 15 laughs per day is not
being met. Humor’s greatest asset is to balance the emotional
scale between positive and negative perceptions.
Although the study of psychology has maintained a
particular bent toward the darker side of the human
psyche, even this is beginning to change, in both the
focus of research and the application of psycho therapy.
Many psychologists argue that the expression of laughter
and smiling is nothing less than a catharsis of emotions,
a physical release tied to emotional thoughts.
Overall, a well-intended catharsis can be quite healthy
to the mind and body. But the complexity of humor
hints of something more than just catharsis. In any
event, mirth serves as a catalyst to unite mind, body, and
spirit for total well-being.
Humor can be used to diffuse both anger and anxiety,
and it can be quite powerful at reducing both emotions.
Frank Prerost (1987), of Western Illinois University, conducted
a study on the use of humor as catharsis for aggression.
Subjects (144 women) were fi rst measured with a
Health Locus of Control survey. Then, they were asked
to rate the funniness of twelve jokes. Results indicated
that aggression-based humor was the most effective in
allowing a catharsis of anger in women with an internal
locus of control. Research by Leftcourt and Martin (1986)
and Porterfi eld (1987) also indicates that humor acts as a
“stress buffer,” or moderator, to decrease the impact of
stressful experiences, particularly the anxiety of major
life-event changes and everyday annoyances.
Frankl, the survivor of Auschwitz discussed in earlier
chapters, noted in his book Man’s Search for Meaning
that humor was a saving grace among fellow prisoners
in the shadows of death. Frankl wrote, “Humor was
another of the soul’s weapons in the fi ght for self-preservation.”
Fear of death even has its own brand of mirth:
black humor. People often joke about death and dying
in an effort to ease their tension and perhaps better
understand their own mortal plight. Hollywood often
uses comic relief in horror movies (e.g., 28 Days Later
and Scary Movie) so that the audience isn’t so emotionally
spent that they miss the fi lm’s climactic scene. It is
virtually impossible to be both angry and happy at the
same time. Thus, if you can separate yourself from your
aggression for a moment and see how silly and out of
character prolonged anger really is, feelings of hostility
dissipate, succumbing to a crescendo of mirth. For this
reason, self-parody is thought to be the type of humor
best suited to dispel anger.
In the book The Healing Power of Humor, Klein (1989)
states that the use of humor gives a sense of power in the
midst of chaos. Being able to make light of a stressful
circumstance allows people to feel they have control
over a situation. Humor becomes a weapon to disarm
the cause of the stress response. Whereas some consider
humor as a catalyst to tap the power of intelligence and
emotional fortitude, others see it as a diversion tactic. In
this case, humor allows for an intermission in the cognitive
war against stressors and a “cease-fi re” of the stress
response. The use of humor therapy in several hospital
Humor Therapy (Comic Relief)
269
Humor therapy: A coping technique; the use of
humor and comic relief as a means to relieve and
reduce emotional stress by focusing on the funny,
humorous, and positive aspects of life.
settings, as noted by Norman Cousins (1989) in his book
Head First, helps to alleviate the sterile atmosphere these
institutions are known for by allowing cancer patients
to momentarily forget intravenous tubes, chemotherapy,
radiation treatments, and bedpans.
In an attempt to better understand humor appreciation,
Psychology Today conducted a survey of its readers in
1978. Thirty jokes were printed along with a questionnaire
to gauge readers’ opinions of the jokes’ quality
and laughability. More than 14,000 questionnaires were
returned, and responses varied as much as the styles of
jokes printed. Humor, like beauty, is a relative concept.
The study concluded that sexual humor was the most
popular topic of jest, with ethnic humor running a close
second. Humor scholar Avner Ziv (1984) offers two
reasons why sexual humor remains so popular. First,
the craving for sexual humor compensates for the continuous
desire to physically satisfy this basic human
drive. Second, sexual humor may compensate for the
disappointment of unmet sexual expectations.
Comic relief is currently used as a mode of therapy in
many rehabilitation programs, including the treatment
of physical trauma, alcoholism, and drug addiction. Psychologists
who recognize the effectiveness of humor
and utilize comic relief with their patients identify it as
both an assessment tool, to indicate values, inner feelings,
and meaning in life, and a therapeutic tool, to
encourage a cathartic release of emotions. In psychotherapy,
it is the patient’s own use of humor that is nurtured
and encouraged; it is not initiated by the therapist.
When patients begin to joke about their conditions or
predicaments, it is acknowledged as a breakthrough in
the emotional self-healing process. Once manifested,
the practice of comic relief is encouraged during laughable
moments. Humor has been found to be very effective
in aiding patients through the transitions of the
many stages of recovery.
Just like other coping techniques that can prove ineffective
for resolution, the power of humor can be abused.
Negative and offensive humor such as racial, ethnic, and
sexist humor, as well as sarcasm in both its delivery and
reception, do not lend themselves to satisfaction as coping
mechanisms. Negative humor may infl ate self-esteem,
but it is a false infl ation with no lasting value. Humor can
also be used as a means of seeking approval by controlling
other people’s attitudes and making them feel good. Used
in this manner, humor takes on an addictive quality,
where each laugh becomes a “fi x” leading to the next
laugh. Thus, humor employed to win the approval of
others takes on the quality of codependent behavior. In a
study by Fisher and Fisher (1983) investigating the personalities
of comedians, it was observed that many professional
comedians and humorists were raised in
less-than-enviable environments, including homes with
alcoholic parents (Carol Burnett), orphanages (Charlie
Chaplin, Art Buchwald), or broken families. In these
cases, the use of humor often brought recognition,
approval, and a feeling of self-validation. In her book It’s
Always Some thing, comedian Gilda Radner (1989)
described her use of comedy as an occasionally negative
behavior: “Comedy is very controlling—you are making
people laugh. You feel completely in control when you
hear a wave of laughter coming back that you have
caused. Probably that’s why people in comedy can be so
neurotic and have so many problems. Sometimes we talk
about it as a need to be loved, but I think that with me it
was also a need to control.”
As a coping technique, humor therapy has the immediate
effect of increasing awareness of the cause of stress, which
may then lead to the path of resolution. The greater the
quantity of laughs and the quality of humor, the greater
the sensation of pleasure. The long-term effects of comic
relief as a coping mechanism at best remain a mystery,
particularly because these have not been investigated to
any great degree. In a study conducted at the headquarters
of the United States Postal Service, a humor course
was offered to a select group of employees. Meeting once
a week during the noon hour for a month, participants
were exposed to both theories of humor therapy and several
comedy videos and cassette tapes (Seaward, Meholick,
and Campanelli, 1992). Participants were measured, by
means of questionnaires, to evaluate self-esteem prior to
and after the completion of the course, as well as perceived
stress before and after each session. Results revealed
that exposure to humorous material seemed to have the
immediate effect of decreasing perceived stress levels, but
apparently had no signifi cant prolonged effect on selfesteem,
indicating that humor therapy is most effective in
dealing with current perceptions and their related
emotions.
The Physiology of Laughter
Norman Cousins was right: Positive emotions augment
the mind-body relationship. Laughter indeed infl uences
the body’s physiology, resulting in restoration and possibly
healing. In his own clinical tests, Cousins noted that
several hours of laughter produced a small but signifi cant
decrease in the sedimentation rate of his blood, a predic-
Chapter 12
270
tor of infl ammation or infection. In Anatomy of an Illness,
Cousins (1976) wrote, “The drop itself (fi ve points) was
not substantial, but it was cumulative.” Once thought of
as only a coping technique, humor therapy now qualifi es
as a relaxation technique as well because of its physiological
effects. Since this discovery, scientists have investigated
the mysteries of the immune system and its
relationship to the experience and expression of various
emotions.
Dr. William Fry has devoted his life to the investigation
of this mind-body relationship, and his work has yielded
some fascinating results. Laughter appears to have both
short-term and long-term effects on the body’s major
physiological systems. In the short term, a bout of laughter
appears to initiate the stress response, with a slight
increase in heart rate, blood pressure, muscle tension,
and ventilations. But this is quickly followed by a
rebound effect, where these parameters decrease to
below previous resting levels. The overall effect is a profound
level of homeostasis, much like that seen when
progressive muscular relaxation is practiced. In the
short term, laughter is credited with stabilizing blood
pressure, “massaging” vital organs, stimulating circulation,
facilitating digestion, and increasing oxygenated
blood throughout the body. As Fry (1986) stated,
“Laughter is clearly related to the reduction of stress
and the physical symptoms related to stress.”
Fry also conducted a series of studies on the composition
of tears, those shed from pain and laughter as well
as those artifi cially induced (e.g., from cutting onions).
His research revealed that the constituents of emotional
teardrops include a greater percentage of proteins and
toxins than those produced artifi cially. Fry concluded
that tears resulting from emotional responses serve to
rid the body of stress-related toxins. Once again, this
suggests that physical expressions—both laughter and
crying—are natural and healthy to the well-being of the
individual. As author Kurt Vonnegut once quipped
(Klein, 1989), “Laughter and tears are both responses to
frustration and exhaustion. I myself prefer to laugh,
since there is less cleaning up to do afterward.”
Perhaps more impressive than the short-term effects of
laughter are its long-term effects. Through the new
multi discipline of PNI, researchers are now fi nding
that the immune system plays an ever-increasing role in
the mind-body relationship. In the words of Bernie
Siegel (1986), “Thoughts are chemicals; they can either
kill or cure.” It appears that thoughts and perceptions
are quickly transformed in the brain into chemical reactions
that have impact throughout the body. Negative
thoughts actually trigger the neural release of the stress
hormones and suppress the immune system. Positive
thoughts strengthen the integrity of the immune system
by inducing the release of special neuropeptides from
the pituitary gland and other tissues located throughout
the body. Neuro peptides—endorphins, interleukins,
and interferons, to name a few—act as messenger molecules
to various organs throughout the body.
Recent research has revealed that neuropeptides are also
manufactured and released by the lymph nodes and other
components of the immune systems (see Chapter 3).
Although only 60 neuropeptides have been discovered to
date, scientists believe there may be several more acting
in the interest of the body’s immune system. In effect,
laughter causes the body to produce its own pain killers.
A study by David McClelland (McClelland and Kirshit,
1989) measured changes in secretory immunoglobulin A
(S-IgA), a salivary immune-defense agent, as a result of
three emotional responses (humor, cynicism, and trust)
elicited by three types of movies. Films of W. C. Fields
and Mother Teresa produced a signifi cant rise in S-IgA,
while a Nazi propaganda fi lm corresponded with a
decrease. The long-term effects of humor and the positive
emotions it produces may serve as one of the most
benefi cial health practices currently known to humanity.
It would be unwise to suggest that humor-induced laughter
can cure all ailments; this simply isn’t true. But humor
can “lighten the load,” making the pain of some diseases
more bearable. In some remarkable incidences, such as
that reported by Norman Cousins, there may also be a
true healing effect. As discussed in Chapter 3, there are
currently too many missing pieces to complete the mindbody
model to our full comprehension. But in the short
time that humor therapy has been employed as a therapeutic
agent in cancer wards, many patients have been
given the opportunity to die with a smile instead of a
lonely frown. And their loved ones have that fond memory
to look back on.
Steps to Initiate Humor Therapy
Years ago, I designed and taught an experimental course
entitled Humor and Health. At least once a week, I was
asked by students how they could improve their sense of
humor. From the volumes of resources I read in preparation
for this course, I gleaned a number of ways to
incorporate humor therapy into your arsenal of stressmanagement
coping techniques. The best suggestions
are as follows.
Humor Therapy (Comic Relief)
271
1. Learn not to take life too seriously. Chris Flanagan,
R.N., is the former head nurse on the oncology unit
at Shady Grove Adventist Hospital in Rockville,
Maryland. Chris was awarded a grant from the
Hyatt Foundation to start a Humor Cart on her
cancer ward. Describing her work, Chris said, “We
have a policy on my fl oor: Take your work seriously,
but take yourself lightly.” Most oncology
wards have high turnover rates among nursing
staff, but this philosophy has kept the nursing staff
at Shady Grove intact for several years now. In a
nutshell, this attitude means seeing yourself as more
than your work. Many times we place all our eggs
in the career basket, and if we have a bad day at
work, then our self-esteem withers away. See yourself
as a whole person, with many aspects and talents,
not just as a student, spouse, or professional.
People who are able to laugh at their mistakes are
considered more emotionally sound than those who
fret at the slightest hint of imperfection. We start
out in life as a square block. Through a multi tude
of life’s experiences, we polish the rough edges and,
by the end, fi nish up a gem.
2. Find one humorous thing a day. Humorous events
and concepts are around us all the time. Life is full
of ironies, incongruencies, and just plain funny
stuff. One’s frame of mind is either receptive to
these or simply dismisses them. If humor is a perception,
as is currently believed, then the way to
adopt comic relief as a coping mechanism is to
adopt this humorous frame of mind and make it
your own (cognitive restructuring). It is commonly
understood that if you make yourself consciously
aware of and receptive to an idea, you will
attract things to reinforce this perception many
times over. Take planning a holiday, for example.
You decide that this summer you want to go on a
safari in Kenya. Once you commit yourself to the
trip, you discover all kinds of people who have
gone on safari with the same touring company,
you start noticing ads in magazines and TV specials,
and your mind becomes a magnet for news
and ideas about Africa. The same can be done
with humor, if you make yourself receptive to the
lighter side of life. Tell yourself that you want to
fi nd one funny thing each day. You will fi nd that
instead of just one little tickle, you will discover a
wealth of humorous experiences each and every
day. In addition, allocate some fun time for each
day, whether this means watching your favorite
sitcom on television, reading comics, or going to
your nearest comedy club.
Chapter 12
272
Stress with a Human Face
It was a hot summer
day, and the
pool looked so
inviting. Andrew
was a bright,
good-looking, athletic kid about to enter high school.
That day, he and his younger brother were making the
most of their summer freedom. The odds of what was
about to happen were about as great as winning $20 million
in the lottery, except Andrew wasn’t that lucky. For
some reason no one seems able to explain, the angle at
which he entered the deep water was just enough to snap
his second vertebra and paralyze him from the neck down.
Within the blink of an eye, freedom became a word he
would cry over. And cry he did. In his therapy, he withdrew
into his own world of darkness.
But one of his nurses had a natural funny bone that
reverberated in its enthusiasm, and in time it became
infectious. Soon Andrew asked to have some cartoon
books brought in to him, as well as some comedy videos.
His bouts of depression became fewer and fewer.
It seemed that with his change in attitude came a
desire to leave the hospital and get back to as normal
a life as could be expected.
If you could see Andrew today, you would be drawn
immediately toward his smile, an attribute he cherishes.
Oh, he still has his downtimes like the rest of us,
but he will be the fi rst to tell you of the healing power
of humor and how it enabled him to cope with a
stressor he would have never imagined facing that fi ne
summer day. Currently, he is a self-proclaimed ambassador
of humor therapy for the disabled, traveling
around the country to share his stories of comic relief.
The new joy in his life is his wife, Lauren, and their
newborn baby girl, Alexis.
Humor Therapy (Comic Relief)
273
It is important to remember, however, that there
are times when it is inappropriate to laugh. People
can interpret laughter as rude during serious
moments, so use caution and judgment. On the
other hand, life is full of laughable moments, when
it is quite acceptable to laugh and smile. When
these times arise, capitalize on them and give
yourself permission to let go and enjoy.
3. Work to improve your imagination and creativity.
Creativity and humor are virtually inseparable.
One has only to read headlines in supermarket tabloids
to be reminded of this: “Termite Baby Eats
Newlyweds’ House,” “Bigfoot Seen Boarding a
UFO,” “Ski Mask Found on Surface of Mars,”
“Teenager Swallows Seed, Grows Palm Tree in
Stomach.” Lately, the creative “muscle” of many
an American has atrophied as the adrenal gland
has hypertrophied. Remember, the funny bone is
just as susceptible to the general adaptation syndrome
as is your adrenal gland. Start placing more
emphasis on this target organ. It is commonly
thought (and currently under study) that the use of
one right-brain cognitive function enhances other
functions of the same hemisphere. Imagination is a
right-brain function. So is humor. They tend to
feed off each other. So how does one augment
imagination skills? Here are a few suggestions:
a. Read more books (fi ction and nonfi ction) and
watch less television.
b. Write a story, fable, or poem every now and
then.
c. Play with children. Kids have wonderful imaginations.
Maybe some of theirs will transfer to
you by osmosis. Get closer to the earth. Observe
the world from the eye level of a young child.
d. Go exploring. Do something completely new
and outrageous. Spend an afternoon in a hardware
store, a museum of fi ne art, or a greenhouse.
Get out of the comfortable rut you
take refuge in and discover the world all over
again.
e. Create something. Pull out a cookbook and
play “Wolfgang Puck.” Make your own holiday
presents this year. Invent something. Plant
a garden. Bonsai a tree. Plan a trip around the
world. Start a new hobby. Make your world a
better place to live in.
4. Start a joke/cartoon-of-the-week swap with a friend.
Use either the U.S. mail or email so that you have
something to look forward to, as well as making
someone else’s day with a chuckle.
5. Learn to hyperexaggerate when describing a situation
or story. A comedian begins his monologue, “I knew
a guy so ugly . . . ,” and a call comes back from the
audience, “How ugly was he?” The comedian continues,
“He was so ugly that if you were to look
up the word ugly in the dictionary, you’d fi nd his
picture beside the defi nition.” Ex ag gera tion is a staple
in virtually all comedians’ joke re pertoires.
Comparisons are hilarious when they are exaggerated,
and they can lighten up the description of the
most stressful event. Ways to employ exaggeration
A bunch of inmates gathered together every Friday
afternoon after basketball practice to tell jokes and lift
their spirits. Because they had been together so many
years, rather than telling the actual joke, they assigned
a number to each joke. Some guy would call out a number
and the group would laugh, sometimes uncontrollably.
One day a new inmate joined the group and after
observing the process of joke telling, yelled out the
number 9. No one laughed! After a few moments, one
inmate muttered under his breath, “Jeez, some people
just can’t tell a joke.”
Comedian’s lament: “I don’t have health insurance. Too
expensive . . . and I was told I have a pre-existing condition.
But I do have a good car insurance policy. It’s the law!
So whenever I come down with the fl u or start to bleed, I
get in my car and drive around looking for an accident.”
Three elderly men are at the doctor’s offi ce for a memory
test. The doctor asks the fi rst man, “What is three times
three?” “274,” came the reply. The doctor rolls his eyes
and looks up at the ceiling, then says to the second
man, “It’s your turn. What is three times three?” “Tuesday,”
replies the second man. The doctor shakes his
head sadly, then asks the third man, “Okay, your turn.
What’s three times three?” “Nine,” says the third man.
“That’s great!” says the doctor. “How did you get that?”
“Simple,” he says, “just subtract 274 from Tuesday.”
BOX 12.4 American Graffiti
include substitution of familiar words with others
(e.g., since your last communiqué . . .) and use of fi gurative
versus literal meanings (e.g., Why do we
drive on a parkway, and park on a driveway?).
Creative use of metaphor is also a component of
exaggeration for a good laugh, as in “My fi nal in economics
was worse than the Spanish Inquisition.”
6. Build a humor library. One of the essentials of coping
is the use of available resources, which can
include anything and everything. For humor therapy,
resources involve the collection and use of
books, tapes, and videos, and even hand buzzers
and water guns. Designate a small corner of your
home for a humor library and start to fi ll the shelves
with a collection of every conceivable resource.
Record and video stores have designated comedy
sections; bookstores have humor sections. No matter
how often you have heard favorite tapes or read
favorite books, they will still trigger a laugh. Don’t
let these resources collect dust, either. Make a habit
of using them frequently.
Here is another idea: Start a tickler notebook.
Buy a notebook and fi ll it with anything that puts
a smile on your face. (See Box 12.5.) It can include,
among other things, cartoons, favorite jokes, letters,
funny photo graphs with your captions
attached, favorite newspaper columns, love
poems, and a host of personal items (e.g., JPEGs/
photographs, birthday cards, postcards) that
make you feel good inside. When I assigned the
tickler notebook to my Humor and Health students,
I gave these instructions: “Imagine that one
day you are diagnosed with a major illness (e.g.,
cancer). What humor time capsule can you assemble
that upon review is bound to jack up your
white blood cell count and put you on the road to
recovery?” We all have down moments; this is
perfectly natural. But an extended period of negative
emotions is neither natural nor healthy. A
tickler notebook is your personal prescription.
And it is a growing organism; keep feeding and
looking after it. Treat it well and it will repay you
a hundred times over.
7. Find a host of varied humor venues. Telling jokes is
only a pebble of the mountain we call humor, yet
it is often the fi rst thing we think of when we hear
the word. But humor can be found in a multitude
Chapter 12
274
Tickler notebook: A collection of humorous items
(e.g., cards, letters, JPEGs, jokes).
The Good Son
An old man lived alone in Idaho. He wanted to spade his
potato garden, but it was very hard work. His only son,
Bubba, who always helped him, was in prison for armed
robbery. The old man wrote a letter to his son and mentioned
his predicament:
Dear Bubba, I’m feeling pretty low because it looks
like I won’t be able to plant my potato garden this
year. I’ve gotten too old to be digging up a garden
plot. If you were here, my troubles would be over. I
know you would dig the plot for me. Love, Dad.
A few days later, the old man received a letter from his
son:
Dear Dad, For HEAVEN’S SAKE, don’t dig up the GARDEN!
That’s where I buried the GUNS and the MONEY!
Love, Bubba.
At 4:00 A.M. the next day, a dozen FBI agents and local
police offi cers showed up at the old man’s house and
dug up the entire area. After fi nding nothing, they apologized
to the old man and left. That same afternoon the
old man received another letter from his son:
Dear Dad, Go ahead and plant the potatoes now.
It’s the best I could do under the circumstances.
Love, Bubba.
Mother Superior
The wise old mother superior was dying. The nuns gathered
around her bed. She asked for a little warm milk to
sip. A nun went to the kitchen to warm some milk.
Remembering a bottle of whiskey received as a gift the
previous Christmas, she opened it and poured a generous
amount into the warm milk. Mother drank a little,
then a little more, then before they knew it, she had
drunk the whole glass down to the last drop. “Mother,
Mother,” the nuns cried, “give us some wisdom before
you die!” She raised herself up in bed with a pious look
on her face and, pointing out the window, said, “Don’t
sell that cow!”
BOX 12.5 Classic Jokes for Your Tickler Notebook
of venues, and the greater the access to a wide
variety of humor media, the more advantageous
this coping skill will be to deal with stress. Humor
venues include (but are not limited to) movies,
theater, books, music, television, and live standup
comedy. Humor and entertainment are also
very compatible, if not always the same. The
human mind likes to be entertained. Be on the
lookout for ways to incorporate a wide variety of
humor venues into your lifestyle.
8. Access your humor network. Every now and then,
there are bound to be times when you fi nd yourself
on the bottom rung of the emotional ladder.
These moments should be recognized and, perhaps
for a short time, even appreciated. But if,
after an allocated period of “emotional downtime,”
you need some help getting up again, don’t
be afraid to call for help. We all know someone
who can make us smile at the mere thought of his
or her name. Call this person and ask for a “humor
lift.” It’s the next best thing to being there.
Conversely, it would be a good habit to minimize
time spent with people who seem to live with
black clouds over their heads; their pessimism is
not conducive to enhancing your positive emotions.
You don’t have to go down with their ship.
9. Improve your self-esteem. It is hard to laugh when
your self-esteem is defl ated. At times, we all think
we are fat, ugly, or stupid, and these characteristics
constitute the punch line of many a joke. Low
self-esteem derives from negative feedback we
create in our own minds and come to believe.
Remember Einstein’s theory: Everything is relative.
Separate fact from fi ction. Give yourself positive
affi rmations every day, accentuate your good
qualities, and learn to accept and love yourself
and all your human potential.
Best Application of Comic Relief
Humor therapy integrates a little cognitive reappraisal, a
little behavior modifi cation, and a lot of fun. Employing
comic relief as a coping style involves a conscious effort
to live life on the lighter side. Humor therapy does not
try to eclipse the emotions associated with anger, fear, or
sadness; it only attempts to neutralize them so that there
is balance to your emotional responses. To best apply the
use of humor in your life, take note of what sense of
humor you best identify with and see if you can sharpen
Humor Therapy (Comic Relief)
275
Patch Adams, M.D., has dedicated his career in the healing profession to the use of humor—
rather than drugs or surgery—as his primary tool of trade. Sharing humor seems to multiply the
effect of laughter on well-being. Here Adams is with refugee children from the former Yugoslavia.
FIGURE 12.6
Chapter 12
276
this edge a little. Also note which type of humor you fi nd
most gratifying and make a habit of employing more of
it in the course of each day. In addition, monitor your
high and low moods and their durations. If you fi nd that
the majority of your thoughts are negative, jaded, or
laced with pessimism, try to balance these out with a
greater number of positive, even humorous, thoughts.
No one who advocates humor therapy suggests that
everybody should always be smiling. This is neither realistic
nor healthy. Emotional well-being is the ability to
feel and express the full range of human emotions, both
positive and negative. The danger lies in the imbalance
of positive and negative emotions because a preponderance
of the latter will ultimately infl ict bodily damage.
Cousins highlighted humor as a symbol of all the positive
emotions that can lend themselves to emotional
well-being. Use humor therapy to fi nd and maintain
that balance of human emotions in your life.
277
Humor Therapy (Comic Relief)
  Cousins legitimized the use of humor therapy when
he treated himself with hours of funny fi lms, which
contributed to the remission of his potentially fatal
disease. The premise of the therapy was that if negative
thoughts can result in illness and disease, positive
thoughts should enhance health. Cousins also
believed that for his health to return he had to take
personal responsibility for it.
  Greeks advocated humor therapy more than
2,000 years ago, as did ancient Africans, American
Indians, and medieval European kings and queens.
However, laughter was declared by the Puritans to
be the work of the devil, and to laugh or smile was
considered a sin.
  Humor is not a positive emotion, but it can elicit
several positive emotions. Humor, like stress, is a
perception.
  Humor is a very complex phenomenon. There are
many types of humor, including parody, satire, slapstick,
absurd/nonsense, black, irony, dry, and sarcasm.
Self-parody is thought to be the best type of humor to
reduce stress, whereas sarcasm is the worst.
  Just as there are different types of personalities, there
are also several senses of humor, including conventional,
life of the party, creative, and good sport.
  There is no one accepted reason why we laugh. Four
theories attempt to explain the nature of the funny
bone: superiority theory, incongruity (surprise) theory,
release/relief theory, and divinity theory.
  Research investigating the psychoneuroimmunological
effects of laughter have found that there is a
strong relationship between good health and good
humor. In essence, laughter helps restore physiological
homeostasis.
  Studies also show that humor promotes mental,
emotional, physical, and spiritual well-being.
  There are many ways to tickle your funny bone and
augment your sense of humor, but like anything
that is worth having, you have to work at it.
SUMMARY
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
1. How is humor best defi ned?
2. List fi ve different types of humor.
3. List the four theories of humor (why we smile/
laugh). Each humor theory can be associated with
one component of the wellness paradigm (mind,
body, spirit, emotions). Which goes with which?
4. How do humor and laughter work together as a
coping technique for stress?
5. List four ways to incorporate more humor and
laughter into your life.
Creative
Problem
Solving
Make it a practice to keep on
the lookout for novel and
interesting ideas that others
have used successfully. Your
idea only has to be original in
its adaptation to the problem
you are working on.
—Thomas Alva Edison
Chapter 13
Creative Problem Solving
281
Light bulb. Bicycle. Printing press. Airplane.
Cotton gin. Telephone. Each one has become
an item of necessity. Necessity, it is said, is
the mother of invention, and the human
mind has risen to the occasion to create some fantastic
inventions. There is no better time for necessity to bear
the fruits of creativity than during times of frustration
when one needs to get from point A to point B.
At one time, the United States took pride in its American
ingenuity. Young in age and pregnant with possibilities,
early generations of Americans made more improvements
to the proverbial mouse trap than there are stars
in the sky. Before the turn of the twentieth century, the
United States was a productive society, the vast majority
of its citizens making more than 70 percent of their
household items themselves. As the country became a
consumer society, however, more and more items were
bought rather than made at home. The availability of
several new inventions, like the washer and dryer, provided
more leisure time. But with some of these inventions,
lifestyles became very comfortable, and our
collective creative skills became dull (Mander, 1978;
Jackson, 2004). With the advent of television, it is said,
the creative American mind began showing signs of
atrophy. People now take a passive role in the creative
process, letting other people do the important, creative
thinking. Experts agree that a happy mind is a creative
mind. The inability to deal with many problems is
directly related to the inability to tap into and utilize
creativity. It would be unfair to point the fi nger of blame
solely at television. Many critics believe that the
American educational system continues to play a role in
the decline of creative skills as well, by stifl ing the limits
of imagination with conformity and critical-thinking
skills. More over, American companies are now looking
to hire Asians who are deemed more creative. The
dominant style of thinking in the Western hemisphere
is considered left-brained: linear, logical and rational,
analytical, and judgmental. Left-brain modes of thinking
are those most rewarded in both school and work
environments. And this style of thinking has devalued
recreational and play time.
Music. Poetry. Architecture. Fiction. Art. Pottery.
Photography. If necessity is the mother of invention,
then play can be said to assume the paternal role in this
relationship. Creativity defi nitely has a playful, relaxed
side to it. Playing is as much a part of human nature as
is work, although playful behavior often atrophies as
individuals make the transition from childhood to
adulthood. But play, like the creativity it stimulates, can
be nurtured. It has been said that more good ideas have
arisen from play in garage and basement workshops
than anywhere else, including the genesis of Xerox
Corporation, Hewlett-Packard, and Apple Computers.
Why is creativity so important? Why do corporate executives
currently pay big bucks to bring in creative consultants
to conduct workshops for their employees?
The answer can be summed up in one word: change.
Change is inevitable. There is comfort in familiar routines,
even if they are boring or stressful. Change meets
resistance. Someone once said that the only person who
likes change is a wet baby. But we live on a planet that
travels at a rate of 66,000 miles per hour in its ellipse
around the sun, with a population of more than 6.6 billion
people. Given these dynamics alone, change is inevitable.
In 1970, Alvin Toffl er wrote a book, Future
Shock, describing the rapid changes the human race
would encounter in the age of high technology by the
end of the twentieth century and beyond. The book
might have been titled Future Stress because, as Toffl er
Calvin and Hobbes © 1992 Watterson. Reprinted with permission of UNIVERSAL PRESS
SYNDICATE. All rights reserved.
FIGURE 13.1
Chapter 13
282
indicated, the shock from rapid change can be very diffi
cult to handle, and even more diffi cult to adapt to.
Resistance to change seems to be a basic part of human
nature. Change is often equated with chaos, and chaos
spells stress. This is where the importance of creativity
comes in. Futurists agree that, given the state of the
world today and the direction in which it appears to be
headed, the inner resource of creativity and the skills of
creative problem solving will be the most important
coping strategy in the coming decade.
Creativity can help make order out of chaos. It has the
ability to make change palatable, even enjoyable. But to
be creative takes the right attitude and a workable strategy.
The ability to be creative resides within each and
every one of us. Creativity is not a gift—it is a human
birthright. But like muscles that atrophy with disuse,
creativity must be exercised to be effective. For those of
you who have let your creative abilities slip into hibernation,
here is a refresher course in the basics.
Julia Cameron is convinced that creativity is truly a
birthright for each individual. In her book The Artist’s
Way, Cameron states that because of a series of factors
found in American society, we have, in essence, not just
dulled the edge of our creative abilities, we have buried
them. But what is lost can certainly be recovered, if not
discovered, by reacquainting ourselves with the creative
juices that course through our human veins. Cameron
insists that the creative process is a spiritual one, and
that to engage in the creative process invites us to participate
as co-creators with that aspect of the divine self.
Connecting with what she calls “spiritual electricity,”
Cameron invites people to step outside the left-brain
way of thinking and unite both hemispheres of thought
when calling upon the creative forces to solve problems
or to enjoy life in its fullness. Quoting sources from
Johannes Brahms and Louis Armstrong to Louis
Pasteur and Carl Jung (who all give credit to a divine
co-partnership in innovativeness), Cameron illustrates
a tapestry of creative skills that is available to everyone.
Think Like da Vinci!
When lists are compiled of the world’s most brilliant,
creative minds, Leonardo da Vinci is found at the top of
many lists. A painter, inventor, scientist, and philosopher,
and a man many consider ahead of his time, da
Vinci is revered as a genius by everyone, including
Michael Gelb. So impressed was Gelb with da Vinci’s
creative genius that he pooled da Vinci’s talents into a
book, How to Think Like da Vinci, so that the rest of the
world could rise a few steps in creative consciousness by
emulating the Italian. Among the many tips in Gelb’s
(1998) book are the following:
Creativity isn’t a gift for a
chosen few. It is a birthright
for everyone. The renowned Blue Man Group show
has been described as a visual and sensory extravaganza,
just one example of people who have put
their creative talents to use. You can, too, in a way
that empowers you.
If you think you’re not creative,
you’ll prove yourself right. You
may not be a Steve Jobs, but everyone has the makings
of a creative person, including you!
FIGURE 13.3
FIGURE 13.2
Creative Problem Solving
283
1. Be curious about how things work; don’t take
everything for granted; ask questions.
2. Make a habit of using all fi ve of your senses to
explore the world.
3. Be willing to embrace ambiguity, paradox, and
uncertainty.
4. Be willing to make mistakes and learn from them.
The Creative Process
The creative process is not complex, but it is wonderfully
profound because there are so many possible ways
to get from point A to point B. During the 1980s, intense
interest in the human creative process developed. And
like the goose that was cut open to fi nd out how she laid
the golden egg, the creative process has since been examined
from every side, angle, and perspective, and has
been dissected and inspected. Unlike the goose, though,
the process wasn’t killed; instead, it has become well
understood so that the creative muscle could fl ex with
strength, power, and agility for the whim and benefi t of
those anxious to use it.
The creative process has two parts, which by no coincidence
match the functions of the right and left hemispheres
of the human brain. Remember that Maslow
(1987) observed a number of characteristics contributing
to total well-being, or as he called it, self-actualization.
Creativity was among these characteristics. In his later
work on self-actualization, Maslow concluded that the
creative process and the path to self-actualization were
one and the same. He called the creative process the “art
of being happily lost in the present moment.” He divided
the creative process into primary and secondary parts.
Primary creativity is the origin of ideas: the playground
of the mind where ideas are generated and hatched.
Secondary creativity describes the strategic plan to bring
to fruition the ideas brought forth in primary creativity.
Secondary creativity is like the mind’s workshop: a place
to saw, chisel, glue, hammer, and polish ideas.
Players on the Creativity Team
Creative consultant Roger von Oech took Maslow’s idea
one step further, dividing primary and secondary creativity
each into two phases. In his celebrated book from 1986,
A Kick in the Seat of the Pants, von Oech’s model of creative
thinking includes a team of four players—the explorer,
artist, judge, and warrior. The explorer and artist provide
primary creativity, and the judge and warrior provide secondary
creativity. The explorer and artist team together
for what von Oech calls the germination phase of creativity.
In this phase, inspiration and imagination are used to
their fullest potential. The germination phase involves
soft, pliable, right-brain thinking. Examples of this thinking
style include irrationality, nonlinear perceptions, synthesis,
metaphor, dreams, humor, and global awareness.
The judge and warrior join forces in the harvesting of the
creative crops sowed in the depths of imagination. The
harvest phase of creativity involves hard, critical, left-brain
thinking. Examples include logic, rationality, linear analysis,
and factual thinking. Each type of thinking style has
an equal responsibility in the creative process. The key is
to let each player do its job without inter ference from the
other three. In the footsteps of von Oech, Charles M.
Johnson, founder of the Institute for Creative Development,
delineates the creative process as a combination of
creative differentiation and creative integration. Like von
Oech, he divides the creative process into four stages:
(1) incubation, (2) inspiration, (3) perspiration, and
(4) administration (Johnson, 2005).
The overall goal of creative thought is to sharpen the
skills of all four team players so that one or two aspects
don’t overpower the others, cause them to atrophy, and
stifl e the entire process. Let us take a more detailed look
at the members of the creative team.
Primary creativity: Maslow’s term for the fi rst
stage of the creative process in which ideas are
conceived.
Secondary creativity: Maslow’s term for the last
stage of the creative process in which a strategy
is played out to have the selected idea come to
fruition.
Explorer: Von Oech’s term to identify the fi rst stage
of the creative process in which one begins to look
for new ideas by venturing outside one’s comfort
level.
Artist: Von Oech’s term to identify the second stage
of the creative process, in which one plays with or
incubates ideas that the explorer has brought back.
Judge: Von Oech’s term to identify the third stage
of the creative process, in which one selects the
best idea and prepares it for manifestation.
Warrior: The last stage in von Oech’s creative process
template, in which the idea is taken to the
street and campaigned to the rest of the world for
its merits.
Chapter 13
284
The Explorer. Although some ideas may actually bubble
to the surface of consciousness, the human mind generally
needs to be stimulated. If the mind is like a fi eld, it needs
frequent fertilization for robust growth of ideas. In the
words of Nobel Prize winner Linus Pauling, “The best
way to get a good idea is to get a lot of ideas,” and to get a
lot of ideas you need to look around. Whether abstract or
concrete, the construction of almost everything requires
raw materials. The explorer searches for raw materials
with which to create ideas. People tend to get into cognitive
ruts. We become prisoners of familiarity, unwilling to
leave our turf, and the consequence is boredom and burnout.
The walls of security can become the bars of imprisonment.
As a result, our ability to create becomes
obstructed. Where should you explore? Anywhere and
everywhere; the possibilities are limitless. Bookstores,
national parks, museums, magazines, rock concerts,
libraries. Leave your territory and go explore a new environment.
Make an adventure out of it. In the spirit of Star
Trek, “Go where no one has ever gone before.”
Singer/surfer Jack Johnson goes exploring by reading
books by Kurt Vonnegut and Joseph Campbell. In an
interview in Rolling Stone magazine, Johnson said, “A
lot of artists fall into a thing where they’re constantly
trying to create art. But I think you can forget to take
things in. You’ve got to fi ll up your mind” (Scaggs,
2008). Rock singer Sting shared that, when looking for
inspiration for his album Sacred Love, he turned to several
volumes of Shakespeare and other notable classics
in his beloved library and, using poetic license, exploited
them to come up with new lyrics to his songs. Examples
like this abound in the arts and humanities. The most
important equipment the explorer needs, then, is an
open mind: a container in which to put the raw materials.
If you explore with a closed mind, there will be no
room to transport the makings of ideas to your mental
workshop. Negative thoughts, too, close a mind watertight.
An open mind employs several attitudes to act as
fertilizer; among these are curiosity, optimism, and
enthusiasm. Curiosity is permission to get lost. In fact,
many explorers do get lost. And when they emerge
from the “woods,” often they have discovered something
far different, and more important, than what they
had set out to fi nd. Columbus was looking for spices in
the Far East and “discovered” a whole new hemisphere.
Roger Sperry was looking for a cure for epilepsy and
discovered how the left and right hemispheres of the
brain process information. Chef “Crusty” George
Crumb was looking for a faster way to cook French
fries (to please his customers), and he ended up with the
potato chip. Alexander Graham Bell set out to create a
hearing aid and invented the telephone instead.
Exploration should be fun. Fun is generated from optimism,
a positive outlook, and enthusiasm, the application
of optimism. When doubt or fear is introduced, fun
disappears and the mind closes up like a steel trap.
Another important piece of equipment for the explorer
is a notebook or pad of paper. Good ideas are like butterfl
ies: They may land, but they soon take off again.
Write them down!
The Artist. Poet William Blake once said that every
individual is “an artist, a child, a poet, and an animal.”
Although you may not consider yourself the likes of
Picasso or Rembrandt, every individual has what it takes
to be an artist. In the role of the artist, you cultivate,
manipulate, and sometimes incubate the raw materials
gathered for ideas until they are molded into functional
use. The role of the artist is perhaps the most challenging.
It also takes some dedication and persistence. If the
explorer asks Where? then the artist asks How? and
What? How can I adapt other ideas for my own use?
What can I do to make this idea my own?
A creativity course was introduced into the College of
Business at Stanford University in 1981 in response to
the criticism that American business lacked creativity.
In their 1986 best-selling book Creativity in Business,
Michael Ray and Rochelle Myers highlight this aspect
of the creative process by including a chapter entitled
“Ask Dumb Questions.” To the artist, questions are the
paintbrush and canvas; to the architect, questions are
the pencil and tape measure. Questions probe for the
seeds of solution. You can begin by asking “What if ”
questions (and not all of these have turned out to be
dumb!). Consider these examples: What if we made a
music video with musicians dancing on treadmills?
What if you could store 5,000 songs in a hand-held listening
device? What if a car ran on electricity rather
than gas? What might seem like a dumb question now
may hold the answer to a nagging problem down the
road. Regarding the creative process, there is no such
thing as a dumb question. “Dumb” questions shift the
train of thought from the left (analytical) to the right
(receptive) hemisphere of the brain, and receptivity is
needed to play with the raw materials of thought. What
if? questions are as valuable a tool to the artist as the
compass and map are to the explorer. Asking What if?
questions gives permission to manipulate and tailor
ideas. Sometimes being an artist means being ridiculous,
turning thoughts upside down or inside out. To an
Creative Problem Solving
285
artist, paint, clay, plaster, and bronze are some of the
media with which to create. In the creative process,
there are many cognitive media as well. Thinking styles
to manipulate ideas include reversing the perspective
on concepts (e.g., throwing a barbecue for Christmas),
connecting ideas together (a squirt gun and toothpaste),
or comparisons (“Life is a cabaret, old chum”). And
here is some food for thought: Picasso once said that
“every act of creation fi rst involves an act of destruction.”
Ideas that worked well in one situation may not
be applicable to other circumstances; however, they can
be adapted to the situation at hand.
The Judge. When the role of the judge comes into play,
a shift from soft to hard thinking takes place. The crops
are ready to be harvested. The judge decides thumbs up
or thumbs down for each idea, with the good ideas
becoming reality. The role of judge is crucial, for it can
just as easily destroy good ideas as bring them to fruition.
In American culture, the judge is usually the strongest
player on the creative team. More often than not, in fact,
the strength of the judge overwhelms and destroys the
team. Rational thought and overanalysis used at the
wrong time are a waste of both time and resources. To
kill or use an idea before it has been manipulated by the
artist’s hands is like walking out of the middle of the best
movie you ever saw. You wouldn’t do that. Neither
would you make a habit of eating unripe fruit. As a rule,
Americans are “top-heavy” in judgment to the detriment
of the other necessary aspects of the creative process. In
the Stanford creativity course mentioned previously, one
of the fi rst concepts students were taught was to “unlearn”
judgment skills. Judgment in the germination stage of
creativity is unhealthy. Later on, in the secondary phase
of creativity, judgment skills are reassembled and
strengthened. The skill of intuition is also emphasized.
Although intuition is regarded as a right-brain function,
it serves as a bridge to left-brain thinking. Intuition is the
quarterback in the football game of creativity.
The role of judge involves taking risks. As inventor
Grace Hopper once said, “A ship in a port is safe, but
that’s not what ships are built for.” To that we can add
this advice from business executive Harry Gray: “No one
ever achieved greatness by playing it safe” (von Oech,
1986). Risk taking can seem like a dangerous proposition
because there is always the possibility of failure. Failure,
of course, can prove painful, a sensation the ego would
rather avoid. With failure is the chance of rejection, and
rejection tends to lower self-esteem. This may sound
incongruous, but failure is the fi rst step to success. Edison
tried 1,800 different types of fi laments before he found
one that worked in the light bulb. Author Mario Puzo
approached nineteen different publishers before he found
one that would accept his manuscript entitled The
Godfather. Contrary to popular opinion, failure isn’t lack
of achievement—it is lack of effort. In the words of comedian
and fi lm producer/director Woody Allen, “If you’re
not failing every now and again, it’s a sign that you’re not
trying anything innovative.”
Risks can be classifi ed as either good or bad. With a little
bit of intelligence, a calculation can be made regarding
the strength of an idea. A good judge weighs the positive
aspects against the negative ones. A good judge isn’t
biased by assumptions that preclude future possibilities.
In the event of a calculated risk that sours, failure can
still be a great teacher. Use your intuition and go with
the good risks.
The Warrior. Giving the green light to go ahead with a
good idea doesn’t signify the end of the creative process.
As von Oech explains, the role of the warrior is to campaign
for the idea. It tries the idea out and markets it. The
warrior is the anchor leg of the creative relay team, and it
doesn’t take any coaching experience to fi gure out that
the anchor leg has got to be strong. Many good ideas sit
around collecting dust because the warrior never fi nished
the race. The role of the warrior, in tandem with the
judge, is to take creative ideas to completion. The warrior
devises a strategy, a winning game plan. On Wall Street,
the importance of strategy and campaigning is summed
up as follows: To know and not to do is not to know.
Warrior skills include good organization and administration
abilities. The warrior also takes risks, but good
risks. To be a good warrior, you need strength and endurance—
strength to carry the idea to reality, and endurance
to carry it far, if need be. A good warrior is an
optimist. A good warrior has confi dence. And a good
warrior is persistent.
A quick review of books on creativity reveals that
although women are just as creative as men, they rarely
receive any acknowledgments. Madame Curie, Fanny
Mendelssohn, and Georgia O’Keeffe notwithstanding,
women receive little if any credit for their creative
efforts. In her book The 12 Secrets of Highly Creative
Women, author Gail McMeekin (2000) not only highlights
scores of creative women and their achievements
over the past few centuries, but also notes the trends
that got them to success. Like von Oech, McMeekin sees
the creative pro cess in distinct stages. Some of the twelve
secrets include acknowledging your creative self, fol-
Chapter 13
286
lowing your fascinations, conquering your saboteurs,
and selecting empowering alliances.
Obstacles to the Creative Process
The act of creation can be most pleasant. Roger von Oech
called it “mental sex.” Maslow (1987) called the feelings
associated with it “peak experiences,” describing exhilaration
or euphoria. If creativity is so much fun, why do so
many people shy away from it? Lately, researchers have
directed much attention to the reasons people shun the
creative process as a whole, as well as its constituents.
Contrary to what you might think, creativity is not solely
a right-brain function. Rather, it is a partnership between
the right brain, the house of the imagination, and the left
brain, the source of organization. There are many reasons
why the creative process becomes stifl ed. Most of these
have to do with the inability to access the functional powers
of the right brain, the overbearing powers of the left
brain, or a combination of the two. What is needed is a
balance of right- and left-brain cognitive skills. Lack of
balance is induced by attitudes and other obstacles that
block the creative process. These attitudes are called mental
blocks, or in von Oech’s terms, mental locks. Von Oech
describes ten mental blocks in his book A Whack on the
Side of the Head, each an attitude debilitating to the creative
process. Four of the most common pertaining to
stress management are The Right Answer (explorer), I’m
Not Creative (artist), Don’t Be Foolish (judge), and To
Err Is Wrong (warrior). Accord ing to von Oech, “We all
need a whack on the side of the head to shake us out of
routines and force us to rethink our problems.” With each
following description of a “lock” is an exercise to “whack”
the side of your head so that you become more creative.
The Right Answer
Is it possible there is more than one right answer to any
problem? More than likely, yes! (See FIG. 13.4   .) But
people generally look for just one answer, call it right, and
then stop looking. Years ago, singer/songwriter Harry
Chapin wrote a song called “Flowers Are Red.” The song
was inspired by a note sent home with his preschool-aged
daughter that said that she had not colored the fl ower
assignment correctly. “Flowers are red, not black,” the
note said. “My fl ower died,” his daughter explained.
Chapin’s daughter symbolizes just one of many millions
of such experiences. From day one we seemed to be educated
that there is a “right” way and a “wrong” way to
everything. In the germination phase of the creative process,
there are many possibilities. If you are in search of
one right answer, you will surely stop once you have found
it. Nothing could be more dangerous.
I’m Not Creative
In one of my courses, I assign students a creativity project
on the fi rst night, to be completed by the end of the
semester. The moans can be heard from one coast to the
other: “I’m not creative.” But in the words of author
Richard Bach (Illusions), “Argue for your limitations,
and sure enough, they’re yours.” Creativity isn’t a per-
BSAINXLEATNTEARS
The creative word game. In the
following line of letters, cross out
letters so that the remaining six letters, without altering
their sequence, will spell a familiar English word.
Learning to think outside
the box. (©2001 Isabella
Bannerman. Reprinted with permission.)
Slice a pie into eight pieces
using only three cuts. There is
more than one right answer.
FIGURE 13.4
FIGURE 13.5
FIGURE 13.6
Creative Problem Solving
287
ception, it is a process. When it is thought of as a perception,
it can be very stifl ing. Everyone is creative—it just
takes work. What separates Pablo Picasso, Georgia
O’Keeffe, and Paul McCartney from those who say they
are not creative is belief in their own creativity. The
inspiration from this belief is phenomenal. At the end of
each semester, I am told repeatedly by students that the
creativity exercise was the best thing they ever did
because it taught them they really could be creative.
Don’t Be Foolish
Have you ever dropped your tray in the cafeteria,
walked around all day with your fl y open, made a presentation
with food stuck in your teeth, or locked your
keys in the car? The embarrassment resulting from
such episodes is painful to the ego. Being foolish is
thought of as being stupid, and stupidity earns no points
in the game of life. We are so cautious about making
mistakes for fear of how we will look in public that we
constantly keep our guard up. But guarded behavior
promotes conformity, and conformity breeds staleness.
In the creative process, this mentality can lead to a concept
called groupthink, where everyone conforms, goes
along with the crowd. Groupthink is dangerous; it stifl
es creativity. Sometimes it is necessary to be foolish. A
giddy outlook gives a new perspective on a situation.
Playing the fool can augment the role of the judge to
determine the worth of ideas. Being foolish can also
mean having a sense of humor, and humor and creativity
make wonderful partners (see Chapter 12).
To Err Is Wrong
There are times when making a mistake is not a good
idea. It may cost you your job, marriage, or life. Then
again, there are times when making a mistake may
result in the most appropriate course of action. Mistakes
offer invaluable learning experiences. In the creative
process, mistakes are necessary. Each mistake bushwhacks
a clearer path to a more viable answer. Errors
are stepping stones to the next workable possibility.
Fear of failure can immobilize the creative process. To
the mind of Thomas J. Watson, founder of IBM, “The
way to success is to double your rate of failure.”
From a different vantage point, Arthur VanGundy
(1982) discusses several types of obstacles or roadblocks
to the creative process in his book Training Your Creative
Mind. They include the following:
1. Perceptual roadblocks. Perceptual obstacles
involve the inability to separate yourself from the
problem. Ego attachment blurs creative vision.
Perceptual problems occur when left-brain cognitive
skills overrule the primary creative processes.
Analysis, judgment, and negative
perceptions place plaster casts around the creative
muscle and cause it to atrophy. There is a time to
open up, and a time to narrow your vision.
Creativity is like humor: Timing is everything.
2. Emotional roadblocks. The primary emotion acting
as an obstacle to creativity is fear—fear of
making a mistake, fear of the unknown, and fear
of rejection, once others fi nd out about past mistakes.
When people say they are not creative,
many times what they are really saying is, “I am
afraid of failure.” Fear of failure can paralyze the
creative thought process. Fears are natural, but
with a little work they can be alleviated or resolved
to enhance creativity. Conversely, sometimes we
fall so deeply “in love” with an idea we have given
birth to that we become blind to its true value or
contribution. In these cases it is often best to “sit
on” the ideas, and give them time to hatch and
prove their merit. But don’t sit on an idea too
long, or someone else might come along with the
same idea and leave you bobbing in the wake of
their creativity.
Connect all nine dots with four
straight lines. Go through each
dot only once. Do not lift your pencil from the paper.
(And don’t be afraid to make a mistake or two.)
Perceptual roadblocks: Obstacles to the creative
process, placed by the ego, in the role of the judge.
Emotional roadblocks: Obstacles to the creative
process, in the guise of fear, such as the fear
of making a mistake (failure), rejection, or the
unknown.
FIGURE 13.7
Chapter 13
288
3. Intellectual/expressive roadblocks. Humans rely
very heavily on vision and hearing, sometimes to
the exclusion of other senses. The consequence
can be poor receptivity to additional information
that could be employed in the gathering and processing
of creative ideas. Language can also be a
real barrier. Words have specifi c but different
connotations to the people who hear them. For
example, a doorway to one person is a passageway
to someone else. Each word represents a different
image and a different result. Don’t let language
become a barrier to your creative thoughts.
4. Cultural roadblocks. We become socialized to
certain thinking patterns. Western culture is now
widely recognized as encouraging left-braindominant
thinkers. That is, the critical styles of
thinking associated with the left brain are praised,
while the cognitive thinking styles of the right
brain are ridiculed or ignored. The net result is
asymmetrical thinking. How can this barrier be
dismantled? One way is to access your right-brain
thinking styles through meditation, yoga, or recreation.
Sidney Parnes, a creative consultant to
the Disney Corporation, advocates listening to
instrumental music to set the imagination free
and get creative juices fl owing (see Chapter 21).
5. Environmental roadblocks. Environmental factors
include personal constraints such as time,
noncreative infl uences (i.e., your friends, spouse,
or boss), and resources such as a support network
of other people. Have you ever had what you
thought was a really good idea and then received
feedback that was less than favorable? Negative
feedback invariably has a toxic effect on creativity.
Be on the lookout for toxic infl uences and
learn to avoid them.
Roadblocks are seldom dead-ends. They are merely
infl uences impeding the fruits of creative labor. Several
of these roadblocks are self-defeating attitudes, but attitudes
can change. If you want to move beyond a roadblock,
surrender the attitude. Other roadblocks may
involve people, places, or things. In these cases, a roadblock
just means that you have to travel a longer distance
to get to your fi nal destination. The removal or diversion
of roadblocks takes a little time. Sometimes you have to
be creative even in the dismantling of obstacles. But in the
end, much strength will result from the effort.
From Creativity to Creative
Problem Solving
Creativity is perhaps one of the most valuable coping
techniques to use in your personal battle against stress.
If the mechanics involved in creative problem solving—
awareness, new ideas, new courses of action, and
evaluation—seem familiar, it is because they are the
cornerstones of many other coping techniques. In addition,
several coping techniques can be included in the
creative strategic plan (e.g., cognitive restructuring,
social engineering, and communication skills). At fi rst
glance, creative problem solving might appear to be a
linear sequential process. Linear thinking, however, is a
left-brain skill. Without a trip through the corpus callosum
for a visit to the right side of the brain, your chances
of bringing troublesome situations to closure are about
as good as an ice cube’s in hell. It makes sense, then, that
use of creative skills in the problem-solving process may
be circuitous rather than a straight line. Creativity may
be used to make order out of chaos, but no one ever said
that orderly is synonymous with linear. This is all right
because many problems are nonlinear, too. Some are
like amoebas, amorphously stretching about.
To illustrate nonlinear thinking ( FIG. 13.8   ), let us
say that you start out gathering ideas to solve a problem,
which is the most logical way to begin. So, you put on
your pith helmet and go exploring to collect ideas.
When you have a lot of raw materials, you pull out your
artbox, toolbox, or whatever toys you need to play with,
and hammer away. But in the course of playing, you
fi nd you need a few more ideas. So, you change hats and
explore some more, and then return to hammering
away again. Soon the hammer becomes a gavel as the
judge steps in to review the progress so far. The judge
approves. “Hmm, not bad,” says the warrior. “Let’s take
this baby out and see if it fl ies.” In fl ight, the artist says,
Intellectual/expressive roadblocks: Obstacles to
the creative process, in this case, created by the
language we use that gives bias to our way of thinking
(e.g., doorway vs. entrance).
Cultural roadblocks: Cultural thinking patterns that
limit our ability to take in new ideas, leading to
asymmetrical thinking.
Environmental roadblocks: Personal constraints
such as time, money, or a host of responsibilities
that impede the creative process.
Creative Problem Solving
289
“Wait! Let’s add this to make it stronger.” So, there are
a few more trips back to the workshop before the product
is fi nished. As you can see, the process, in practice, is
anything but a straight line.
Steps to Initiate Creative
Problem Solving
Just as there are many paths to enlightenment, there are
many solutions to each problem. Granted, some may be
more viable than others, but rarely, if ever, is there only
one way out. This is perhaps the most important concept
in creative problem solving. Among the several
theories of creative problem solving, some common
concepts do emerge ( FIG. 13.9   ), yet the paths to and
from these concepts vary signifi cantly depending on the
person using them. The fi rst step in creative problem
solving is to write everything down on paper. This will
make the other steps easier.
Description of the Problem
Before you can attack a problem successfully, you have
to understand it. This means looking at the problem
from all sides. Objectively state the problem. Defi ne it.
Give it some history. Give it someone else’s perspective.
Project its future infl uence. Then, subjectively state
how you feel about it, the depth of your involvement,
and the impact or infl uence it has had on you. Next,
analyze the problem. Dissect it. Look at its components.
What are its strengths and weaknesses? What is its face
value and what is the bottom line? Once you have a
handle on the nature of the problem, then you can move
on. Remember, though, that throughout the creative
process, you will want to revisit this description because
over time you will gather more information about it.
Any subsequent changes to it may, in turn, alter the
fi nal approach you select to handle the problem.
Generating Ideas
Generating ideas is fun; it is also challenging. So, where
do ideas come from? Memory is a good place to start—
previous experience is always a good teacher. But memory
alone isn’t enough. Ideas should come from any
available resource, both internal and external, from
books to people, movies, museums, and you name it.
This is where the explorer role comes in. The more
Description
of the
problem
Idea
implementation
Generating
ideas
Idea
selection
and
refinement
Evaluation
and
analysis
of action
plan
The map of creative problem
solving. Creative problem solving
is rarely a linear process because what appears
to be a good idea at the start may result in heading
back to the drawing board and starting all over
again until success is achieved.
Creative problem solving: A coping technique;
utilizing creative abilities to describe a problem,
generate ideas, select and refi ne a solution, implement
the solution, and evaluate its effectiveness.
The
problem
The
The warrior
judge
The
explorer
N
S
W E
The
Solution
An
Alternative
Solution
The
artist
Creative problem solving is
rarely a linear process.
FIGURE 13.8
FIGURE 13.9
Chapter 13
290
ideas you can come up with, the better your chances of
solving the problem effectively. When searching for
ideas, leave mental censorship behind. Take in every
conceivable idea, even if it seems ridiculous. If you start
to censor ideas before you gather them, you will come
up empty-handed.
Idea Selection and Refi nement
Not all of your ideas will be good or usable. But you won’t
know that until you spread them all out and look at them
collectively. Play with the ideas. Order them. Circle them.
Line them up like an army of troops. Once your ideas are
out on the table, one or two are likely to jump out at you.
You might also want to rank-order (judge) your ideas by
degree of feasibility (plan A, plan B, plan C, and so on)
because not every idea will work, and the idea that looks
best now might fl op the hardest. Now bring in the artist
again and manipulate your idea of choice. Manipulation
means adapting the idea to “best fi t” the problem. You
may need to streamline the idea or to otherwise change it
a little to suit your specifi c needs. Once you have selected
your fi rst choice, play it out in your mind. Visualize the
idea. What are the pros and cons? Explore hypotheticals
and look for potential weaknesses that could be corrected
to avoid major pitfalls. Expect the unexpected. Now
remember plan B and plan C. A person without options
is a person in trouble, so you will want to have some backups.
Give some thought to your second and third choices
because there is a good chance you will someday use
them. Once you have narrowed your ideas down to one
choice, it is a good practice to do a quick inventory to see
what resources it may require. Not all ideas require additional
resources, but many do. Remember that resources
may include people as well as material goods, and don’t
overlook those intangible resources, the hidden talents
within each individual.
Idea Implementation
Implementation takes bravery—perhaps not much, but
in the face of stress, maybe a lot. Implementation
involves a game plan, a strategy. This means thinking
about how the idea can be put into effect and end in resolution.
It means trying the idea out. In addition to
bravery, implementation requires faith.
Evaluation and Analysis of Action
A good inventor observes his or her invention to see
how well it works. When the tests are through, either a
bottle of champagne is opened or there is a trip back to
the proverbial drawing board. Problem solving works
the same way. The fi nal lesson a problem has to offer is
if and how well it has been resolved. This takes a bit of
analysis, so once again call the judge back in to declare a
verdict. But there is no verdict of guilty or not guilty.
There is either a hard pat on the back or a soft kick in
the seat of the pants. In life’s journey, you will do well to
have an equal number of each, as all of our rough edges
need to be polished.
Best Application of Creative
Problem Solving
We all have the skills to be creative; the issue is whether
we choose to use them. With this coping technique,
there really is no choice if you want to deal effectively
with stress. How good are your exploring skills? Do
you have a curious nature? When was the last time you
ventured someplace you have never been before to shop
around for ideas? How good are your artistic talents?
When is the last time you played in the garage or basement?
For that matter, when is the last time you just
plain played? Is your artist’s hammer a judge’s gavel in
disguise, ready to smash an idea before it is ripe? These
are some questions to ask yourself to fi nd out your
strengths and weaknesses in the creative process. Once
you identify these areas, you are ready to sharpen these
skills.
Psychologist Abraham Maslow said that creativity is a
necessary skill to deal with the stress of change. As the
understanding of right- and left-brain cognitive skills
continues to unfold, it is becoming increasingly obvious
that the mind is capable of much more intelligence than
was thought before. Creative problem-solving skills are
life skills—skills to not only survive but also thrive
through the potential chaos of change. Once refi ned,
these skills can and should be used repeatedly as the
foundation of every strategy used to confront and
resolve stress.
Here is an idea for you to enhance your creativity skills.
Be on the lookout for great ideas that you can adapt for
yourself. Begin this adventure by fi nding a three-ring
notebook. Then, start collecting images, ads, anything
that inspires you to be creative. What you are doing is
collecting raw materials to adapt for future projects or
problem-solving solutions. This notebook will become
a very valuable resource. Know that the most brilliant
minds have one of these (and refer to it regularly).
  Necessity is the mother of invention. When problems
arise, solutions come from creative thinking.
However, in American culture, critical rather than
creative thinking is rewarded.
  In troubled times, people look to the epitome of
genius for guidance. da Vinci’s creativity offers insights
on how we, too, can be creative.
  Maslow found two stages to the creative process:
primary creativity, where ideas are generated in a
playful mode; and secondary creativity, where these
ideas are refi ned and implemented.
  Von Oech outlined four phases of creative thinking:
the explorer, the artist, the judge, and the warrior.
The fi rst two roles are responsible for searching out
and generating ideas, whereas the second two refi ne
and implement the selected idea.
  Roadblocks to the creative process can occur at any
stage; however, most occur at the explorer and artist
phases. Four roadblocks were described in this chapter:
The Right Answer, I’m Not Creative, Don’t Be
Foolish, and To Err Is Wrong.
  VanGundy categorizes obstacles to creativity as
roadblocks—emotional, intellectual/expressive, cultural,
and environmental.
  The creative problem-solving strategy has fi ve
phases: describing the problem, generating ideas,
idea selection and refi nement, idea implementation,
and evaluation and analysis of action.
  Creativity is a large component of mental wellbeing.
The right and left hemispheres of the brain
work together as a team to overcome problems resulting
in acute or chronic stress.
1. Why is creativity thought to be such an important
coping technique?
2. Describe the four stages of von Oech’s creativethinking
process model.
3. What are four common roadblocks to the creative
process?
4. List the fi ve steps in the creative problem-solving
process.
SUMMARY
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
APPENDIX: ANSWERS TO CREATIVE PROBLEMS
FIGURE 13.4
BANANA and/or LETTER
FIGURE 13.5
FIGURE 13.7
Creative Problem Solving
291
Communication
Skills The three most important words
for a successful relationship are:
communication, communication,
and communication.
—Anonymous
Chapter 14
Chapter 14
294
Communications in the WiFi age
John owns an up-and-coming telecommunications
fi rm. Just years out of college, he is the epitome of success:
a great job, a beautiful wife Sherry, two children
(twins), a 4,000-square-foot house, and a six-fi gure salary.
What began as a fascination with software programs
in high school quickly led to a management
position with the biggest phone company in the country.
But the cell phone technology that launched his
career nearly became his downfall. One day his wife
gave him an ultimatum: the cell phone or her.
John, it turns out, had quite the addiction to his
BlackBerry. During conversations with Sherry, he
would constantly check his email, text messages, and
voice mail. These communications were not only business
links to the outside world, they were an ego-driven
fi x of sorts, at the expense of his marriage. At fi rst Sherry
was upset that John interrupted every conversation with
what she called “the other woman.” Then, she became
indignant—she couldn’t even have a decent conversation
with her husband unless she called him on the
phone. Finally, she gave him an ultimatum: If the
BlackBerry wasn’t turned off at home, she was leaving—
with the twins! John admits he had no choice, so
now the BlackBerry stays in his car when he pulls into
the driveway each night. He knew she was right.
Experts fi nd that John’s troubles are not a singular event
(Koprowski, 2006; www.abc.com, 2008). Moreover,
people, particularly young adults, are changing their
communication styles about as quickly as the technology
that they communicate with changes. Ironically,
young people (from middle school to graduate school)
send text messages, email, and voice mail, often while in
proximity of the person with whom they are communicating.
For some it’s a whole new language (e.g., LOL,
4EAE, and BTDT). For many, it’s the preferred way to
communicate. But instant messaging doesn’t mean an
instant reply, despite expectations to make it so. Unmet
expectations often result in frustration (stress!). If young
people aren’t instant messaging or sending email, they
are keyboarding information through their MySpace
page or Facebook page. In fact, so new are the changes
in technology that few studies have been done to understand
the ramifi cations of how communication skills
affect relationships when convenience holds a greater
priority than content. But this we do know: Email
doesn’t convey voice intonation. Text messages don’t
convey body language (an important part of communications),
and voice mail can’t replace eye contact. All
this means that much is lost in translation. As such, the
potential for stress in interpersonal relationships is
increased dramatically when incomplete forms of communication
are used. Poor communication skills of
one’s thoughts and feelings not only affect roommates,
spouses, children, and colleagues; the ripple effect goes
beyond the family and worksite to the entire community,
as was observed with the Virginia Tech massacre.
Despite the rapid advances in technology and how we
employ these means to express ourselves, the basics of
communication skills remain the same.
The Basics of Communication Skills
If you were to make a list of your top ten stressors, you
would probably fi nd that at least half of these involve
relationships with family, friends, and co-workers.
Strong relationships necessitate good communication
skills. To paraphrase poet John Donne, “No man is an
island entire of itself. Each is a piece of the continent, a
part of the main.” As such, our lives are fi lled with much
interaction. Like molecules ricocheting around a glass
jar, we are bound to come in contact with a number of
people over the course of any day. These “contacts”
often prove stressful because of the nature of our communicative
interactions. Experts indicate that the average
person spends approximately three-quarters of his
or her waking day communicating with others. Included
under the rubric of communication are phone calls,
emails, text messaging, blogging, lectures, staff meetings,
dinner conversations, listening to radio and television,
and simply talking with friends and acquaintances.
The degree of perception and interpretation required
for communication, and the many layers of meaning in
even common words, leaves much room for misunderstanding—
and hence stress. This is why the practice of
good communication skills is so important to help minimize
and resolve misunderstandings. Good communication
skills are essential as a coping technique.
To be a good communicator, one must not only express
thoughts and feelings in understandable words, but also
listen, clarify, and process information as it is intended.
Communication skills are so important in the business
world that workshops and seminars are given regularly
on this topic; poor communication skills are simply not
cost-effective. As you will see in this chapter, almost
every theory and accompanying skill is based on common
sense. Yet common sense is often bound and
gagged when the ego is threatened. When people are
defensive, their ability to gather, process, and even
exchange information becomes greatly impaired. The
Communication Skills
295
result is miscommunication and the stress that miscommunication
produces.
Conversational Styles
Each person has his or her own distinct style of communication.
According to linguistics expert Dr. Deborah
Tannen of George Washington University (2001), not
only do the interpretations of words cause misunderstandings
in relationships, but so do the styles in which
people speak. Both, she notes, are a major reason for
marital problems and, in some cases, divorce. Moreover,
Tannen indicates that people from different regions of
the country have specifi c communication styles (e.g.,
New York City versus Texas). And, perhaps to no surprise,
men typically display a different communication
style than women do. Communication styles include,
among others, dominant, interruptive, manipulative,
polite, creative, sarcastic, and passive means. It is friction
caused by differing conversational styles that causes
or adds to confl ict. In our attempts to communicate
under stress, styles become exaggerated, which Tannen
terms schismogenesis, thus further widening the gap of
misunderstanding.
A particular conversational style is a type of behavior,
which in some situations may need to be refi ned, adapted,
or changed to resolve issues between two people. Take,
for example, the case of a woman from Texas who moved
to Washington, D.C., as an assistant director of human
resources management for a large company. Within
weeks her communication style and demeanor were perceived
as unassertive, whereas in Texas she had been
praised for being appropriately polite.
In her much-acclaimed book That’s Not What I Meant,
Tannen also describes the serious problem of misinterpretation
of the spoken message. Tannen calls the underlying
intent of communications metamessages, or the
meanings of the messages that are clear to the speaker but
masked by a particular vernacular and style construed as
polite or nonoffensive. Misunderstanding is compounded
by the interpretation of the listener as well. For instance,
upon learning that his sister Sheila is pregnant, Mark
may ask, “Did you quit smoking yet?” The metamessage
What He or She Said
You’ll be using one of the leading textbooks in the fi eld.
The answer to your question is beyond the scope of this
course.
You’ll have to see me during my offi ce hours for a thorough
answer to your question.
In answer to your question, you must recognize that
there are several disparate points of view.
Today we’ll let a member of the class lead the discussion.
It will be a good educational experience.
The test will be 60 questions, multiple choice.
The test scores were generally good.
The test scores were a little below my expectations.
Some of you could have done better.
Are there any questions?
What It Really Means
I used it as a grad student.
I don’t know.
I don’t know.
I really don’t know!
I stayed out late last night and didn’t have time to prepare
a lecture.
The test will be a 60-question multiple guess, plus three
short-answer questions (1,000 words or more), and no
one will score above 75 percent.
Some of you managed a B.
Where was the party last night?
Everyone fl unked.
I’m ready to let you go.
BOX 14.1 What the Professor Really Means
Schismogenesis: A term coined by Deborah Tannen
suggesting that exaggerated conversation styles
become intensifi ed under stress, thus adding to
miscommunication.
Metamessages: The underlying intention of verbal
communication when people are indirect with their
comments, thus adding to miscommunication.
Reprinted by permission of J. Timothy Petersik, Ph.D., Ripson College.
Chapter 14
296
expresses concern for the health of the baby. But Sheila’s
interpretation may be that Mark is passing judgment
on her health habits, making her quite angry. From
Tannen’s research, she has come to the conclusion that
people—or Americans, at least—tend to be indirect
rather than direct in the messages they communicate,
whether out of politeness, fear, or manipulation. This
indirectness is a precursor to perceived stress, and greatly
compromises the effectiveness of communication, leading
to further misunderstanding and potential confl ict.
Verbal communication is one way to get a message across,
but by no means the only way. Metamessages also are
stated indirectly through postures, clothes, and facial
expressions. Thus, communication is basically categorized
as verbal and nonverbal.
Verbal Communication
Verbal language is a series of expressive thoughts and
perceptions described through word symbols. Linguistic
experts divide verbal communication into two components:
encoding and decoding. Encoding is the process
wherein a speaker attempts to frame thoughts and perceptions
into words (e.g., someone saying to the person
next to her, “Boy, it’s stuffy in here”). Decoding is the
process wherein the message is translated, dissected,
analyzed, and interpreted by the listener (e.g., the person
hearing this thinks, “Yeah, the room does smell
rather gamey”). Misunderstanding, confusion, and
stress can arise anywhere in this process.
Although it may seem that two people who speak
English would have a common understanding of all
English words, in fact variations in the meanings given
to words can lead to much confusion as well. Anyone
who has traveled to Great Britain, Australia, or New
Zealand has discovered that even in English-speaking
countries, language barriers exist. For example, a
jumper is a dress in the States, whereas it is a sweater
Down Under. More over, you don’t have to leave
America to experience this phenomenon; vernacular
differences can be found all across the country. For
example, the words tonic, soda, and pop are all used colloquially
to describe soft drinks. But in the Boston area
a tonic is considered a cola, whereas in Denver it denotes
seltzer. Additionally, cultural vernacular gives rise to
new meanings for words, often representing the opposites
of their dictionary defi nitions. For example, the
word bad may have negative connotations to you, but
currently many people employ this adjective to describe
something emphatically good, as in “That’s a bad hat.”
Quite often, the meanings of words are arbitrary. And
possessing both literal and fi gurative meanings, words
and expressions can also be ambiguous. FBI chief J.
Edgar Hoover once corrected a memo his secretary
typed with a note to “watch the borders” (margins).
Misunderstanding, she added his comment to the memo
and sent it out nationwide. Immediately all FBI agents
on the Canadian and Mexican borders were placed on
alert. Verbal and written communication is more complex
than meets the ear or eye.
The key to interpersonal communication can be
summed up as: Say what you mean, and mean what you
say. In other words, be direct. Implementing this rule in
our conversational style, however, is extremely diffi cult.
One reason confusion arises is that there are many concepts,
ideas, and particularly feelings that are diffi cult to
articulate within the limits of vocabulary. Thoughts,
like color photographs, can often be described only in
black-and-white terms, leaving many details to assumption,
interpretation, and imagination. Some thoughts
cannot be expressed in words at all, and the words we
choose to describe the contents of our conscious minds
can limit our own understanding of what we wish to
express as well.
The Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, created to explain the use
of words, suggests that our perception of reality is
largely based on the depth of the vocabulary in which
we express ourselves. In other words, our vocabulary
limits our understanding of our current reality. So,
someone with a limited vocabulary will have a more
diffi cult time expressing him- or herself, as is easily
illustrated when learning a new language. Even when
vocabulary does appear to describe thoughts adequately,
words are often used to camoufl age true feelings in an
attempt to avoid hurting others or even ourselves. The
inability to express how we really feel can also promote
unacknowledged anxiety.
Encoding: The process in which the speaker
attempts to frame his or her thoughts and perceptions
into words.
Decoding: A process in which the listener attempts
to understand what the speaker has encoded in his
or her verbal message.
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis: The idea that our perception
of reality is based largely on the words we use
to communicate or express ourselves.
Communication Skills
297
Communicating Ideas and Feelings
Sharing personal ideas and feelings is referred to as selfdisclosure,
opening up and revealing a part of you that is
not obvious from external appearances. Self-disclosure is
based on mutual trust. It is believed by those who study
communication skills that all verbal communication
involves some element of self-disclosure. It can be a double-
edged sword, for there is risk in divulging personal
insights and feelings. When individuals sense that sharing
feelings will promote a closer relationship or bonding,
then the risk is assessed as minimal and opening up
is worth it. If rejection or alienation may ensue, however,
then the degree of openness will be greatly limited.
Likewise, when trust has been violated in the past, the
ability to self-disclose is greatly compromised. One might
think that the closer two people are, the greater the depth
of self-disclosure there is, and initially this may be true.
But in many cases, once the parameters of a relationship
are established, laziness sets in and styles are taken for
granted, thus leaving many perceptions and assumptions
that may or may not represent true feelings.
Describing feelings differs from expressing feelings, in
that description involves the use of words, whereas
expression may include physical responses such as crying,
laughing, touching, or some other physical action.
Although there are many ways to express emotions,
verbal communication is deemed essential when they
involve other people. When feelings are not put into
words, assumptions occur in the minds of those with
whom you interact, and assumptions can be dangerous.
These guessing games often lead to confusion about the
intentions and thoughts of everyone involved. Again,
the result is frustration and emotional pain.
Nonverbal Communication
Nonverbal communication is described as any communication
that does not involve words. It may include postures,
facial expressions, touch, and even style of clothing.
Nonverbal communication differs from verbal communication
in that it is multichanneled—addressing all
senses—not merely stimuli received through the sense of
hearing. Nonverbal communication is not only indirect,
but often unconscious. Conversely, verbal communica-
Swimming was Johnny’s passion, and you could tell just
by listening to him talk about it. He was a freestyle
sprinter, and proud of it. Training and competition are
not without their stressful moments, nor is the transition
from high school to college swimming an easy one.
In a visit to my offi ce one day, Johnny confi ded that he
was having some problems, specifi cally communication
and attitude problems, with the coach. “I’m a sprinter,
not a distance swimmer,” he exclaimed. “And I thrive on
positive reinforcement. All I seem to get is negative
talk. I can tell he really doesn’t like me.”
“Johnny, have you made it a point to sit down and talk
with the coach?” I asked. “Does he even know you feel
this way?” The answer was No! “I know this guy,” I continued,
“and he’s a lousy psychic. He can’t read your
mind. You’ve got to talk to him. Make an appointment
to see him, tell him how you feel, and give it to him
straight. Tell him exactly what you’ve told me.”
It didn’t take
much for Johnny
to agree this was
the only reasonable
course of
action. Although I saw him at several home swim meets
after that, the subject never came up and I never thought
to ask about it. But about 6 months later, when I was at a
basketball game talking with the swimming coach and he
mentioned Johnny’s name, I inquired about the rapport
between the two.
“Oh, we get along great,” the coach replied. “Less than a
month into the season, he came to see me and presented
his perception of our relationship, his need for lots of
positive feedback, negotiating some sprinting events with
distance events, and a few other aspects of training.” I
just nodded and smiled. I know someday Johnny will be
not only a fi ne swimmer but a wonderful coach himself.
Stress with a Human Face
Self-disclosure: The process in which a person
reveals various aspects of him- or herself that are
not readily apparent.
Nonverbal communication: All types of communication
that do not involve words, including body
language and facial expressions.
Chapter 14
298
tion is typically dominated by conscious thought. Ideally,
nonverbal messages support verbal communication, reinforcing
words with gestures to promote a clearer understanding
of the intended message. However, a spoken
message can also be contradicted by nonverbal gestures.
The result is a series of mixed messages and the feelings
these incongruencies generate.
Research shows that when a contradiction occurs between
verbal and nonverbal messages, people are more inclined
to believe nonverbal cues (“the body doesn’t lie”) (Barker
and Collins, 1970). Several factors have been identifi ed as
elements of nonverbal communication, any of which can
either reinforce or contradict spoken messages. These are
categorized as either physical or nonphysical elements.
Physical Elements
Research shows that there are many styles of nonverbal
communication, involving a number of physical
movements:
1. Touch. Touch is thought to be a universal form of
communication. Handshakes, pats on the back,
and hugs are the most common forms of touch.
As a rule, Americans tend to be less contact oriented
than other cultures (Stoeltge, 2003; Field,
1999), although comfort levels vary greatly from
one person to another. Depending on the style of
touch, the individual, and the circumstances, this
nonverbal form of communication can be perceived
as either threatening or reassuring.
2. Emblems and illustrators. Emblems are defi ned as
physical gestures that replace words, such as the
“OK” symbol and the thumbs-up sign. Many
emblems have been incorporated into American
Sign Language, used by those with hearing
impairment. Illus tra tors, on the other hand, are
movements that augment verbal communication,
such as waving your hand by your face to show
how hot you are. Emblems are often used when
speech is prohibited (in a church or lecture hall),
while illustrators typically accompany a verbal
narrative.
3. Affect displays. Facial expressions, or affect displays,
are often used to express a point also made
through the spoken word. Banging your thumb
with a hammer hurts, and the facial contortion
usually following afterward suggests the intensity
of the pain.
4. Regulators. Regulators are nonverbal messages
used to regulate or manipulate a conversation.
Eye movements, slight head movements, and
shifting weight from foot to foot can send a message
for the speaker to speed up, slow down,
repeat, or hurry up and fi nish a sentence. Although
regulators are sometimes important to communication,
they can also be construed as rude, depending
on their nature.
5. Adaptors. Adaptors are often called body language,
and they are important ( FIG. 14.1   ). Adaptors
are believed to be among the most diffi cult physical
Body language can be more revealing
than the spoken word. Studies
show that people trust body language more than
verbal communication.
FIGURE 14.1
Emblems: Physical gestures that tend to replace
words, such as the thumbs-up signal.
Illustrators: Movements or postures used in combination
with verbal conversation, such as various
hand motions.
Affect displays: Facial expressions used to express
a particular emotion (e.g., amazement).
Regulators: Nonverbal messages used to regulate
or even manipulate a conversation, including eye
movements and other types of body language.
Adaptors: The most diffi cult type of nonverbal communication
to decode, such as the folding of one’s
arms across the chest or the crossing of one’s legs.
Communication Skills
299
elements to decode in nonverbal communication.
Folding your arms across your chest or crossing
your legs away from the speaker may, or may not,
indicate boredom, defensiveness, or aggression.
6. Paralanguage. Paralanguage consists of the elements
of speaking that color the use of words.
Pitch, volume, and rate all convey inferences that
infl uence the listener.
Nonphysical Elements
Many additional factors sensed by speakers and listeners
communicate a host of impressions, from values to
feelings:
1. Territorial space. Each individual maintains an
area of comfortable personal space or territory
around him- or herself. When personal space is
invaded, it causes feelings of discomfort. Too
great a distance between people may also cause
uneasiness or feelings of rejection.
2. Clothing. Styles of clothing send very strong messages
about personal values, attitudes, and behaviors,
and may or may not meet the expectations of
other individuals in one’s environments. Professional
settings, for example, call for a particular
style of clothing. That which deviates from the
expected or normal dress code can communicate
anything from ignorance, to disrespect, to a rebellious
attitude.
Knowing that communication involves both verbal and
nonverbal messages, it is important to recognize and
utilize elements of both to make your style of communication
as effective as possible. Recognition and utilization
of effective verbal and nonverbal skills require,
specifi cally, listening, attending, and responding skills.
Listening, Attending, and
Responding Skills
The process of communication is like the two sides of a
coin. The fi rst side represents self-expression; the second,
listening. You have probably heard someone say, “He
heard me, but he didn’t listen to what I said!” Hearing is
the reception of auditory sensations, whereas listening is
the understanding of these auditory sensations. Research
shows that in a typical day more than 50 percent of communication
involves listening (Burley-Allen, 1995).
Under closer observation, however, individuals show a
general complacency about listening and attending skills;
they may hear, but they do not listen very well. In the
words of Tannen (2001), “Communication is a system.
Everything that is said is simultaneously an instigation
and reaction, a reaction and an instigation. Most of us
tend to focus on the fi rst part of that process while ignoring
or downplaying the second.” Typically, in conversation,
when people fi nish expressing a thought or feeling,
they almost immediately begin to prepare their next
statement, listening only to the fi rst couple of words of
response. The most common example occurs during
introductions, when a new person states his or her name
while you prepare to say yours. Seconds later, you cannot
remember what the person’s name is. As a rule, the concentration
required for listening is very tiring.
The key elements involved in effective listening, attending,
and responding are the following:
1. Assume the role of listener. Listening requires that
all attention be paid to what the speaker is saying.
Your mind should be clear of all thoughts that
direct attention away from the speaker. Attention
to your own thoughts, rather than the message
directed to you, is the primary reason for poor listening
habits. Although the role of speaker and listener
shifts back and forth several times in the
course of a conversation, don’t prepare comments
or rebuttals while you are in the role of listener.
2. Maintain eye contact. Good eye contact is considered
essential to effective listening. Wandering
eyes suggest wandering thoughts. Lack of eye contact
can also convey disinterest in the subject or the
person. Good eye contact does not mean continual
staring, as this can be construed as an invasion of
personal space. Good eye contact conveys respect
for the person to whom you are listening.
3. Avoid word prejudice. Some words elicit obvious
emotional responses, which then lead to disinterest
or surprise. Words such as feminist, gay, Jew, or liberal
can press buttons and set emotional wheels
spinning, resulting in raised eyebrows, frowns, and
side glances. Recognition of these types of words
and the responses they elicit will enable the listener
to prepare to be objective. The listener’s objectivity
is believed to enhance the communication process.
Paralanguage: A term used to describe speaking
aspects such as volume, tone, and pitch, that actually
color verbal language.
Chapter 14
300
4. Use “minimal encouragers” to indicate that you are
on the same wavelength as the person speaking to
you. Minimal encouragers include short-word
questions such as “oh?” and “uh-huh?” and
repeating key words to encourage the speaker to
give you more detailed information. These should
be used genuinely, not mechanically.
5. Paraphrase what was said to ensure understanding.
Paraphrasing is a more elaborate style of minimal
encouragement. In addition to repeating key
words, paraphrasing includes the use of personal
observations to ensure understanding of the content
of the message intended.
6. Ask questions to improve clarity of statements. When
you are at a loss to understand facts, concepts, or
feelings expressed to you, questions become
imperative. But beware. Questions can sometimes
put the speaker on the defensive. Use questions to
clarify your understanding, not to confuse the
person you are listening to.
7. Use empathy to refl ect and share feelings. Empathy
is thought to be an important attending skill that
galvanizes the listening experience. Empathy
refers to attention to the speaker’s feelings as well
as thoughts. This does not imply that you must
adopt these feelings as your own. Rather, you
should recognize the feelings in the individual
with whom you are conversing.
8. Provide feedback. Responding to the speaker often
requires feedback from the listener. Before you
offer feedback, however, inquire whether it is
desired. Sometimes people speak as a means to
increase self-awareness using you, the listener, as
a sounding board. The speaker may not want
feedback. If your viewpoint is wanted, offer comments
and criticism in a constructive way.
Feedback should be specifi c, combining feelings
and reasons for or details of your opinions. If and
when criticism is elicited, balance positive and
negative perceptions, and be specifi c. To be effective,
criticism should offer insights.
9. Summarize the content of what was said. Summarization
is similar to paraphrasing thoughts, but it
requires more concentration on and synthesis of
the speaker’s thoughts and feelings into an integrated
understanding.
These are just a few elements that can be used to enhance
your listening skills. They can also increase the effectiveness
of delivery and interpretation of your thoughts
and perceptions. Regardless of how effective you think
your communication skills are, even under the best circumstances
there is still room for misunderstanding
and confl ict as, for example, in the interpretation of a
mixed message.
Confl ict Resolution
Confl icts often arise because of misunderstanding both
verbal and nonverbal messages that are sent and
received. Although confl icts can occur within yourself
as well as between you and other individuals, it is the
latter type of confl ict this section will address. Typically,
confl icts between individuals involve emotions associated
with anger and fear. Left unresolved, they can generate
many toxic thoughts, including resentment and
hostility. Ideally, confl icts should be resolved right
away; however, not every situation allows for this. A
roommate who goes away for the weekend leaving the
apartment a shambles, or a boss who sends an email at
4 p.m. asking you to hand in a report by 5 p.m. are two
instances that necessitate a postponement of confl ict
resolution. People often need some time to organize
their thoughts for confl ict resolution. In any case, the
sooner a plan of resolution is implemented, the better.
Although confl icts tend to be multidimensional, scholars
divide them into three categories:
1. Content confl ict. Content confl icts arise from the
misunderstanding of factual information, defi nition
of terms or concepts, goals, or elements of strategies
used in a cooperative effort. Disagree ment
occurs over the perception of information available.
In this type of confl ict, the problem is not in dispute;
rather, it is the solution to the problem that generates
confl ict. Examples include how to fi nance a
house, where the best place to go on vacation is, or
what time the movie starts at the cineplex.
2. Value confl ict. When a person has confl icting values
within his or her own value system, value clarifi
cation is needed. But when values between people
collide, resolution is much harder. Value confl icts
can often be seen on the political scene, as when
Confl ict resolution: The resolution of arguments
displayed as three styles: content confl ict, value
confl ict, and ego confl ict.
Communication Skills
301
forces lobbying for the environment (spotted owl)
oppose economic forces (lumber industry). The
result is often a compromise, with neither side
obtaining a complete (or satisfactory) victory.
3. Ego confl ict. Ego confl ict is based on a win-lose
mentality. Confl icts of this nature involve the
manipulation and control to support one’s identity,
and to prove one is right. Ego confl icts are
based on power, competency, identity, and emotional
attachment. They are thought to be the
hardest type to resolve ( FIG. 14.2   ).
Confl ict-Management Styles
Several management styles deal with confl ict. Not all
styles are benefi cial and, in fact, some may actually perpetuate
confl ict. The following offers descriptions of
both negative and positive confl ict-management styles:
1. Withdrawal. When a confl ict seems overwhelming,
the fi rst reaction is usually avoidance.
Withdrawal can be defi ned as either a physical or
a psychological removal from the problem.
Walking out of a room, taking a circuitous route
to your offi ce or dorm room, or merely remaining
silent are examples of avoidance. Many people
fear confrontation beacuse of previous confl ict
experiences that left deep emotional scars.
Withdrawal is seen as a coping style, albeit regressive,
when confl icts involve fi gures of authority,
such as bosses or parents, or when a person feels
outnumbered by colleagues or peers. On the positive
side, withdrawal can be benefi cial when it is
used as a time-out to cool off, as long as a “timein”
follows shortly thereafter. Withdrawal is typically
regarded as immature behavior, and thus a
negative confl ict-management style, because
physical or verbal absence prevents resolution.
2. Surrender. To habitually give in to a situation or
problem is also construed as a negative confl ictmanagement
style. Like withdrawal, surrender is
a type of avoidance people use to appease fellow
workers, family, peers, and especially close friends
and spouses for fear of rejection and damaging
Communication skills are paramount
in resolving confl icts, but each person
must have a chance to share thoughts and feelings
to make this skill effective in reducing stress. (Non-
Sequitur © 2002 Wiley Miller. Reprinted with permission
of Universal Press Syndicate. All rights reserved.)
FIGURE 14.2
Confl ict-management styles: There are fi ve confl ictmanagement
styles: withdrawal, surrender, hostile
aggression, persuasion, and dialogue.
Confl ict resolution requires adept
communication skills, such as
those demonstrated by Former UN Secretary General
Kofi Annan during the Kenyan crisis of 2008. All
confl icts, large or small, require these same diplomatic
skills.
FIGURE 14.3
Chapter 14
302
relationships. But surrendering to the will of others
defl ates self-esteem. What might look like a
noble act actually inhibits complete resolution.
Resolu tion of confl icts involves decisions by all
parties involved. When one person holds back,
merely expressing dissatisfi ed agreement, the
merits of a solution are unbalanced. This style of
confl ict management generates feelings of
victimization.
3. Hostile aggression. The words confl ict and confrontation
often bring to mind visions of yelling, fi sts
pounding, and objects fl ying across the room.
Indeed, this is how some confl icts are handled.
Aggression is often used as a form of intimidation
to manipulate others into submissive agreement.
Verbal aggression is more common than physical
aggression, with the use of harsh words and
increased speaking volume to win points. Rarely
does aggressive behavior result in the resolution
of any confl ict and, in fact, it often perpetuates
resentment. Unbroken, this cycle can repeat itself
forever.
4. Persuasion. Persuasion is defi ned as an attempt to
alter another person’s attitude or behavior. It is
believed by some scholars that all verbal expression
is rooted in persuasion. When persuasion is used to
win a confl ict at the expense of others, it is viewed
as negative. But persuasion can be a positive style as
well. In the initial stage of the confl ict-resolution
process, all voices need to be heard. Persuasion may
include the use of reason, emotional awareness, or
motivation to get a point across. When used tactfully,
persuasion opens new lines of thinking,
which can then be tools to resolve issues and promote
mutual agreement.
5. Dialogue. Dialogue is a verbal exchange of opinions,
attitudes, facts, and perceptions that opens
the doors to greater understanding of the nature
of the problem. During the dialogue process, discussions
center on the costs and benefi ts of solving
a problem. Dialogue involves the same steps as
those employed for creative problem solving (see
Chapter 13). In dialogue, negotiations are a means
to a solution to which all parties feel they have
made a contribution. Compromise plays an
important role in the dialogue process because the
intent is to reach a decision that is agreeable to
everyone.
Steps to Enhance
Communication Skills
The following are additional suggestions to strengthen
your communication skills and help promote confl ict
resolution. They may look like common sense, but they
bear listing because under stress the walls of the ego are
thick. The more we remind ourselves of these skills, the
more likely we will be to use them.
1. Speak with precision and directness. To express
yourself clearly, select words that accurately
describe your thoughts and feelings. Be direct
about your thoughts and perceptions by verbalizing
the intent of your message as clearly as
possible.
2. Enhance your vocabulary. Vocabulary affects the
effectiveness of verbal communication. A small
vocabulary decreases the ability to express yourself,
whereas a greater number of words to choose
from provides you with greater fl exibility to say
what you want to say.
3. Use language appropriate for your listening audience.
The manner in which you speak to a child
probably differs from that which you use with an
adult. Assess which words, expressions, and gestures
are most conducive to getting your point
across.
4. Attack issues, not people. When trying to resolve
confl icts with others, focus on the problem, not
the people involved. In other words, avoid character
assassination. Attacking people clouds the
issue and makes it harder, if not impossible, to
resolve issues.
5. Avoid putting others on the defensive. When initiating
self-disclosure or a dialogue to resolve confl
icts, begin your statements with “I perceive. . . .”
Placing the responsibility of understanding on
yourself rather than blaming others minimizes
defensiveness.
6. Avoid asking someone else to pass on your thoughts
and feelings to a third party. The most effective
communication involves talking with someone
face to face. Involving a third party (e.g., “Please
tell my roommate to call John”) not only increases
the chances of miscommunication, but not making
personal contact also sends one or more nonverbal
messages.
Communication Skills
303
7. Avoid information overload. Attention span is limited,
as is the amount of information that can be
received and processed. The greater amount of
information given, the greater the chances some
of it will get lost. Be careful to pace your conversation,
allowing ample time to process the messages
that have been expressed.
8. Validate your assumptions. Confi rm what you
think to be true with those who have given you
this impression.
9. Resolve problems when they arise. If you feel there
is a misunderstanding, there probably is. Avoiding
it, or giving it too much time to fester, allows the
conscious mind to validate feelings of victimization,
anger, or fear. Try to deal with issues as they
surface by talking them out with those involved.
In the short term, this may seem confrontational
and threatening, but in the long term, it relieves
the pressure of undue stress and promotes inner
peace.
A chapter on communication skills would be incomplete
without some mention of the dialogue that takes place
between sexual partners. In light of the facts that more
than 1 million people in the United States are now
infected with HIV or have AIDS, and that the incidence of
date rape is so high, this aspect of human behavior can
no longer be left to assumptions. Tannen was right that
men and women have different styles of communication,
and nowhere is this more evident than in sexual relations.
Because of American social mores, the issues surrounding
sexual relations are still considered taboo in
normal conversation. Ironically, it may be these very
mores that have nurtured an environment of hostility and
anxiety with regard to sexual issues. At a time when trust
is paramount, sexual desire and arousal seem to shortcircuit
the self-disclosure so vital to one’s health.
There are many issues involving sexual intercourse that
are stressors behind closed doors. These include contraception,
birth control, the risk of pregnancy, infertility,
sexually transmitted diseases, vaginismus, molestation,
celibacy, guilt, rape, self-respect, abortion, impotency,
premature ejaculation, intimacy, the ability to reach
orgasm, homosexuality, and sexual satisfaction. As you
can see, this (incomplete) list is quite long, and each
topic weighs heavily as a stressor for those who experience
it. Problems of a sexual nature do not go away
once a couple has initiated sexual relations, either. To
the contrary, if communications are poor at the start of
a relationship, they tend to get worse as the relationship
continues. Sex counselors advise that before, during,
and after every act of sexual intimacy there should
be a thorough conversation airing problematic sexual
issues. As any AIDS patient or woman with an unwanted
pregnancy can tell you, the short-term pleasures of sex
are surely not worth the risks involved. And days,
months, or years of agony may ensue when other sexual
matters go unresolved. Make a point to include a healthy
conversation as part of your sexual habits.
BOX 14.2 Pillow Talk
Chapter 14
304
  Three-quarters of our waking day is spent in some
form of communication. Typically, stressors involving
other people are caused by miscommunication.
  There are many conversation styles. Miscommuni
cation may result when two or more styles are
incompatible.
  Schismogenesis refers to the process wherein
people become more deeply entrenched in their
own communication style, widening the gap of
mis understanding.
  Tannen believes that one reason for misunderstandings
between people is that they tend to
speak in metamessages, or indirect expressions of
thoughts. Indirectness can result from many different
intentions.
  Communication is divided into verbal and nonverbal
forms. Verbal communication involves both encoding
our thoughts into words and decoding other
peoples’ words through the sifter of our perceptions.
During the encoding and decoding process, some
thoughts can get lost in translation.
  Verbal communication involves some level of selfdisclosure.
The degree of disclosure depends on the
level of trust among those involved.
  Nonverbal communication involves a host of gestures
and postures, as well as intonation. Handshakes,
hugs, fi nger gestures, clothing, and territorial space
are examples of how we communicate nonverbally.
  Communication also involves listening and attending
skills: the ability to receive and interpret information
as it is intended.
  Miscommunication can lead to confl icts, which are
broken down into three types: content confl icts,
value confl icts, and ego confl icts. The last are the
hardest to resolve.
  There are effective and noneffective confl ict-management
styles. To withdraw, surrender, or act aggressively
is not effective. Persuasion and dialogue
are advocated as effective ways to negotiate, compromise,
and come to a peaceful resolution.
  Sexual intimacy without dialogue is an open invitation
to acute and chronic stress. Sex counselors advocate
a healthy dialogue before and after every act
of sexual intimacy.
  Several suggestions, based on common sense, were
listed to improve your communications skills. For
these skills to be effective, they must be practiced
regularly.
SUMMARY
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
1. Why do many stress-related problems involve
poor communication?
2. List three aspects of verbal communication.
3. List three aspects of nonverbal communication.
4. List the fi ve confl ict-management styles and
highlight the most effective one.
5. What are fi ve ways to improve your communication
style?
Resource
Management:
Managing Time
and Money
The best way to
save your money
is to fold it in half
and put it back in
your wallet.
—Anonymous
Chapter 15
Resource Management: Managing Time and Money
307
Time and money. Time and money. For
most people, it seems as if every stressor
involves time and money because these two
resources are constantly in high demand
and often squandered. Would you agree? If so, you are
in good company. A great many people think that most
of their problems would simply vanish if they had a few
more hours in the day and a few extra thousand dollars
tucked away in a private bank account. The sad truth
is that old habits die hard. Unless a change of attitude
is adopted, more time and more money will merely
result in more responsibilities and more purchases
(and possible debt). Consider these sobering facts: The
average American typically pays off his or her December
Christmas shopping bills in June of the following
year. The average American has 2.5 credit cards with
approximately $5,000 of credit card debt and little or no
savings. Perhaps it’s true that Americans have “champagne
taste on a beer budget,” but bad habits start early
in life. The average college student owns four credit
cards and has about $2,327 of debt, according to MBNA
(Wilmington, Delaware), and that amount doesn’t even
include tuition or school supplies (McPeak, 2005).
This chapter fi rst looks at the topic of fi nances. It then
examines the essentials of budgeting your time so that
you can begin to utilize these two precious resources for
your best interest. Before you continue reading, please
consider completing the “Self-Assessment: Your
Relationship with Money” survey in the workbook
titled The Art of Peace and Relaxation Workbook to help
you determine what your relationship is with money.
Money Matters
You might think that maintaining one’s personal
fi nances, including keeping a checkbook balanced,
would seem rather simple with these four simple rules:
1. Make a budget and follow it.
2. Don’t spend what you don’t have.
3. Pay all your bills on time.
4. Put away at least 10 percent of your monthly
income into a savings account (and don’t touch it).
If only it were this easy. Giving in to life’s many temptations,
big and small, can add up signifi cantly over a short
period of time. For example, the cost of a high-end cup of
coffee priced at $4.00 each day adds up to approximately
$1,400 per year—enough for a spring-break vacation. It
is good to live in the present moment, but don’t squander
it! The key to managing your money is to maintain a
healthy balance. On the one hand, you don’t want to be a
neurotic, penny-pinching Scrooge; on the other hand,
you cannot afford to be fi scally fl amboyant. People never
get rich throwing their money away. Today, it appears
that too many people are squandering their income,
spending their paychecks as if they were all discretionary
income, or—worse—living on credit cards.
The relationship between fi nances and stress has always
been a dubious one, ever since the fi rst coin was exchanged
for goods millennia ago. However, with the
advent of credit cards, it became all too easy to spend what
you don’t have, making fi nancial debt a very common
stressor, and for most a way of life. Although it’s true that
buying now and paying later with a credit card provides a
sense of power, the truth is that it’s an illusion of power.
Think back to Chapter 4 and Freud’s concept of the ego.
Remember, the ego (whose purpose is to decrease pain and
increase pleasure) also loves power, even if it’s a delusion.
Mass Marketing to Your Ego
Are you one of the countless Americans who lives outside
your means? Do you spend your money eating at
restaurants and buying lots of nice brand-name clothes?
Do you purchase expensive coffee and entertain yourself
with a huge plasma TV screen? Does shopping give
you a sense of power? Do you purchase material possessions
to fi ll a spiritual emptiness? Do your mood swings
mirror the daily stock report? Are you swayed by instant
gratifi cation? Do you make purchases (retail therapy) to
allay your anxieties and frustrations? Do you buy items
that your friends have, like iPods or satellite radio?
Keeping up with the Joneses is a full-time job, and sadly
one that never pays a dividend. Rather, it takes hardearned
money away.
The next time you watch TV, pay close attention to the
lifestyles of the characters. Few, if any, shows deal with
poverty—it doesn’t make good viewing! Actors in TV
sitcoms and crime shows alike portray upper-middleclass
people striving to become upper-class people.
According to researchers, the subtle advertising in TV
programming is akin to an intravenous tube delivering a
desirable lifestyle that most people cannot afford (and
Retail therapy: The behavior attributed to people
who go shopping to alleviate their stress. The consequence
is buying things they don’t really need on
a budget they cannot always afford.
Chapter 15
308
this doesn’t even include the commercials). The ego,
looking for pleasure (and a quick fi x), is easily manipulated
by slick corporate marketers eager to sell you anything
and everything (remember P. T. Barnum’s
philosophy, “There’s a sucker born every minute!”).
Take a quick look around you at the clothes people are
wearing. How many people do you see walking around
as unpaid billboards for corporate America? Take a look
around your house or apartment. How many purchases
have you made on impulse that are now collecting dust?
Marketing to the insecurities of the ego has become an art
form in corporate America (Schlosser, 2001). With the
proliferation of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies
to determine the brain’s neural code for each thought
and behavior, scientists have now teamed up with marketing
experts to unlock the code for greater purchasing
power, which may soon allow marketers to bypass the
ego altogether. The term for this strategy is “neuromarketing.”
Harvard marketing professor Gerald Zaltman
has fi led a patent (#5,436,830) for his technique to market
goods and services to your unconscious mind using Jung’s
theory of archetypal images (Szegedy-Maszak, 2005).
The Psychology of Poverty
A theory, often attributed to 1998 Nobel Prize winner
Amartya Sen, suggests that if you took all the money in
the world from the wealthiest people and distributed it
evenly among all the planet’s inhabitants, in less than
2 years it would all be back in the hands of the people who
initially held it. Why? Because human nature is prone to
act on fear (and laziness). As such, people’s attitudes are
very hard to change. Most people would quickly spend
their portion, some would simply lose theirs, gamblers
would gamble their money away, and very few people
would save or invest their funds. As odd as it might
sound, many people have a fear of money, or simply
stated, a fear of the lack of money, often called poverty
consciousness (Twist, 2003). Unfortunately, the fear of
poverty becomes a self-fulfi lling prophecy that repels
money rather than attracts it, and this thought process
becomes a never-ending cycle played out in daily behaviors,
according to Joe Dominguez and Vicki Robin,
authors of the best-selling book Your Money or Your Life.
Money Problems? Try This . . .
Perhaps the causes of money problems are as varied as the
amounts of money found in each person’s checking
account. Stated in simple economic terms, the demand
for goods and services always exceeds the supply of cash
in hand. Regardless of what the expenses are, the result
begins with fi scal hemorrhaging and ends up with undeniable
debt. Catastrophic medical bills and huge car
repair bills are one thing, but frivolous spending is
another—and currently in this country it’s reaching epidemic
levels. There is no shortage of suggestions on how
to pull in the reins of one’s fi nancial spending. Here are
some time-tested tips to consider.
Tips for Financial Freedom
1. Make and follow a budget. If you don’t already
have a budget, now is the time to create one. If
you do have one, when was the last time you fi netuned
it? The Self-Assessment included in the
workbook is an example of a typical personal
budget sheet. You should know, within a few
dollars, how much you have each month to spend
as discretionary income.
2. Live a sustainable lifestyle. Life isn’t a sprint, but
rather an ultra-marathon. As such, spending
money should be well paced, yet some people
spend like there is no tomorrow. A sustainable
lifestyle means living a conscious lifestyle, in
which purchases are made consciously rather
than frivolously. It also means enjoying the present
moment, while keeping a wary eye on the
future. A sustainable lifestyle also means buying
only what you will use and not wasting precious
natural resources. Behaviors include using reusable
cloth grocery bags; carpooling when possible,
library DVD rentals, and driving a hybrid car.
3. Freeze your credit cards. Credit cards are nothing
more than expensive loans. Every time you pull
out a credit card, you are borrowing money and
paying a high interest rate (13 to 23 percent). Get
in the habit of going cold turkey with your credit
cards. One suggestion is to cut up all but one card,
stick the remaining card in a glass of water, and
then place the glass in the freezer. This tactic
ensures that you will use it only for emergencies.
4. Keep a spending journal. If your money or debit
card burns a hole in your pocket, and you are not
sure where it really goes, start a spending journal
Poverty consciousness: A term used to describe an
attitude or perception held by a person reinforcing
the idea that he or she never has enough money,
which in turn becomes a self-fulfi lling prophecy.
Resource Management: Managing Time and Money
309
to see where your money is wasted. (Quicken is a
recommended accounting software program that
allows you to keep track of your spending habits.)
You may be quite surprised at how quickly frivolous
spending adds up and refl ects a habit of hardearned
money going down the drain.
5. See each purchase as an investment. What are
your assets? Your house, your car, your stock
portfolio? Every purchase you make is an investment,
yet most of these items depreciate to nothing
quickly, including clothes. Here is a question
to ask yourself: Will I want or use this item a year
from now? If the answer is no, then walk away.
6. Consolidate your debt. Do you have several credit
card bills and other loans? Talk to your bank
manager about consolidating your debt into one
loan, and pay it off as soon as possible.
7. Consider opening a 401(k) or a Roth IRA as soon
as possible (Kranz, 2005). As a college student,
retirement may seem like a long way off, but when
it comes to investing in your retirement, it’s right
around the corner. Tuck a small amount into a
retirement plan each year (even if you think you
cannot afford it) so that you can live a comfortable
life in your golden years.
Michelle Singletary is a syndicated columnist for the
Washington Post and the author of Spend Well, Live Right.
Following are some of her tips for achieving fi nancial
stability:
1. Remove yourself from temptation. If you don’t
have money to spend (or waste), then don’t hang
around people who go shopping and spend lots of
money because this can become a trap. Also,
before you go shopping, make a list of what you
really need and maintain the willpower to buy
only what’s on your list.
2. Ask “why” before you buy. Do you really need
the item you’re about to purchase? Underwear
and toothpaste are necessities. Lattes, appetizers,
weekly DVD rentals, and new shoes are not.
3. Don’t buy on impulse. If you fi nd something you
like, hold off from buying it that day. Sleep on it.
If it’s still something you think you need, go back
the next day.
4. Be wary of bargains. You may save money on
sales, but many people end up spending more
money than they expected by purchasing more
items than they need. Rather than saving money,
they spend money they don’t have.
5. Clean your house. One of the best incentives to
curtail uncontrolled spending is realized by taking
stock of what you already have. There is no need to
buy something, only to fi nd out you already own it.
And follow the 2-year rule: If you haven’t used an
item or article of clothing in 2 years, donate it to a
charity before it collects more dust.
6. Learn to say no to your kids, spouse, friends, and
marketers. Don’t allow other people to spend your
money for you. Identify good boundaries with your
money and be assertive with these boundaries.
Suze Orman is a best-selling author on the topic of fi nancial
planning and a syndicated television fi nancial expert.
Her tips for fi nancial freedom include the following:
1. Adopt a healthy attitude toward money. What
is your relationship with money? Do you have
poverty consciousness? Do you waste money? Do
you repel money? Do you maintain the fi scal poverty
attitude of your parents? Your attitude
toward money has a lot to do with how little or
how much you have, and will have over time.
2. Make sound fi nancial goals. Do you intend to work
for the rest of your life? Do you have a retirement
account? Can you see beyond your next paycheck?
Do you want to take a yearly vacation? Financial
goals are guidelines to help you achieve fi nancial
security. What are your goals? What is your longterm
strategic plan for fi nancial security?
3. Put your money to work for you. Even if you
think you have no money to invest, you really do,
even if it’s only $100 per year. There are mutual
funds, IRAs, shares of stock, Treasury bills, and
savings accounts available for investment. Talk to
a fi nancial advisor (usually the fi rst consultation is
free) to discuss your options and make a plan to
have your money make money for you.
4. The best fi nancial advisor is you. Having a fi nancial
advisor is good, but remember that advisors
are making money off of your money. Get sound
advice, and then do your homework by reading
books on this topic. Check out information on the
Internet. Learn how to budget your money, how
to invest your money, and how to make your
money work for you.
Chapter 15
310
Money management is a skill that takes practice. Now is
the time to put these skills into practice. Your wallet, your
marriage, and all aspects of your life will thank you.
The Hands of Time
The constructs of seconds, hours, days, months, and
years are creations of the human mind. It is believed
that the concept of time was originally created to master
the natural environment, particularly the position of
the sun over the earth and the change of seasons. The
Babylonians are credited with the fi rst 360-day calendar,
comprised of 12 lunar months, each with 30 days.
In due time, 5 days were added to the year by the
Egyptians to compensate for rotational differences
between the earth and moon. Additional changes were
made by the early Romans, and again by Pope Gregory
XIII in 1582, who devised the contemporary, or
Gregorian, calendar. On a smaller but no less important
scale, the fi rst mechanical clock is credited to an eleventh-
century Chinese man, Su Song. Two more centuries
would pass before a similar machine would appear
in the Western world, a clock constructed of iron gears
and weights built for an English monastery. The pendulum
clock arrived 300 years later, through the creativity
of a Dutch scientist, Christian Huygens. Pocket
watches were in vogue at the turn of the twentieth century
until the invention of the wrist watch. With the
advent of high technology, time is now measured in
nanoseconds through the use of quartz crystals and digital
displays (O’Connor and Robertson, 2002).
As civilizations developed and technology was shared
among cultures, awareness and utilization of time contributed
to the organization and advancement of the
human race, and hence became accepted ways to make
order out of chaos. Time became a tool used by various
societies to unite and synchronize the efforts of individuals
in their communities. American time zones
(Eastern, Central, Mountain, and Pacifi c), for example,
were created by railroad companies to synchronize their
schedules over various parts of the country, and were
eventually adopted by the United States government in
1883. Global time zones followed suit in 1884 (Boslough,
1990).
Once conceived, time has been manipulated constantly.
The international dateline, daylight savings time, and
leap year are three examples of attempts to refi ne and
manipulate the basic constructs of time. The 8-hour
workday is another. In an attempt to harness time and
manipulate it for gain and pleasure, however, citizens
of the industrialized world have often found themselves
to be slaves to the concept rather than masters of it. The
result: Time, or the lack thereof, is now considered to be
a premier stressor in the lives of many people. And
although time is not considered a precursor to disease
and illness in itself, a rushed lifestyle, or as psychologist
Robert Levine (1989) calls it, “clockwork blues,” which
constantly disrupts the body’s biological clock, is now
associated with the incidence of coronary heart disease,
ulcers, and other stress-related illnesses. Perhaps not
surprisingly, more people have heart attacks on Monday
mornings than on any other day of the week.
Looking busy might be considered a status symbol to
some people, but not to Stephan Rechtschaffen, M.D. In
his highly acclaimed book Time Shifting, Rechtschaffen
explains that being overproductive is an index of stress,
a fast-paced rhythm that leads to dysfunction.
Rechtschaffen says that the rhythm of society itself is
increasing, and many people are unaware they are
caught up in it. People are entrained by the rhythm of
their working environment in what he calls hyperproductivity.
The short-term gains may seem impressive.
The long-term results are devastating to one’s health.
Rechtschaffen, who founded the Omega Institute for
Holistic Studies in Rhinebeck, New York, suggests that
we need to learn to time shift—that is, to decelerate
from the fast-paced lifestyle by consciously changing
the rhythm of our activity to live in the present
moment.
He’s not alone. With daily quantum leaps in technology
and continual access to information at one’s fi ngertips,
experts agree that good time management means getting
back to basics of simple organization (Morgenstern,
2000; Allen, 2003).
Current research into leisure habits suggests that the
two limiting factors (stressors) on recreation and leisure
are time and money (Edginton et al., 2005). Many
people who have come to the conclusion that time
equals money compound the effects of this stressor.
With advances in technology and perceived increases
in responsibility, time, or the mismanagement of it, has
often become an enemy—and a major stressor unto
itself. In light of time as a stressor in today’s culture,
this chapter places special emphasis on changing negative
perceptions of this construct as well as manipulating
it to allow individuals to make order out of their
personal chaos.
Resource Management: Managing Time and Money
311
Time management is actually a part of a larger coping
skill referred to as social orchestration ( FIG. 15.1   ).
Social orchestration is a cognitive strategy employed to
help minimize stressors without avoiding them. This
technique is a reorganization process where you manipulate
factors and elements (not people) in your environment
to your best advantage so as to travel the path of
least resistance. Social orchestration involves analyzing
a problem, creating a series of viable options, and then
choosing the best option to clear stress-prone obstacles
out of the way (see Chapter 17). To manipulate time in
a well-organized fashion so that it can bear the fruit of
productivity is the essence of time management.
According to time-management expert Robert Roesch,
despite the fact that the pace of life is speeding up with
the rush of technological advancements, from cell
phones to palm computers, the age-tested means to
manage time remain the same. However, with the
impending invasion of technology in our personal lives,
maintaining proper boundaries is paramount to one’s
sanity and overall health. To paraphrase Roesch (1998),
unless you are a physician on call, you do not need to be
accessible 24 hours a day through cell phones. Finally,
technology is marketed to be time saving, all in the
name of increased productivity. As we all know, this is
not always the case. Use technology to simplify, not
complicate, your life.
In attempting to be more effi cient, the human mind
tends to break down and compartmentalize entities,
such as time, into smaller parts to better comprehend
and manipulate them. Neurophysiologists who have
studied right- and left-brain cognitive functions have
observed that the right hemisphere has no concept of
time, and they therefore agree that time awareness is
clearly a left-brain function. Yet imagination and spatial
awareness have been found to be crucial factors in
the effective utilization of time. So, it would be wise to
assume that the effective management of time involves
the cognitive functions of both cerebral hemispheres.
Time management can be defi ned as the ability to prioritize,
schedule, and execute personal responsibilities to
personal satisfaction. Time management is a relatively
new concept in both personal and professional development.
Corporations that desire greater productivity invest
their own time and money in creative consultants to train
and educate their employees to manage time more effi -
ciently. The following are some of the lessons they teach.
Roadblocks to Effective
Time Management
Before one can begin to employ strategies for the more
effi cient use of time, several roadblocks must be overcome.
With a greater awareness of pertinent attitudes,
issues, and concerns, the ability to employ time-management
skills, without becoming stressed in the process,
will become a strong coping strategy when needed.
There are many reasons for mismanaged time, including
attitudes about oneself and one’s working environment
or organization, personality styles, values, and
lack of knowledge about time-management skills.
The most prevalent of these are attitudes and their associated
behaviors. In her book How to Put More Time in
Your Life, Dru Scott addresses some of these attitudes.
Scott refers to these as “secret pleasures” because the
human ego can actually derive pleasure from them; they
ultimately act as defense mechanisms. Some of these
simple pleasures include attention or recognition for
being late (e.g., for meetings and appointments); manipulation
or control; avoidance—walking or running
away from the task at hand; and “hex-insurance” or
rationalization—an attitude that too much organiza-
Taking time to balance your checkbook
(either electronically or on
paper) is essential for managing your money. In an
age of credit card debt, make a habit of only spending
what you have, and make sure you know where you
stand fi nancially.
FIGURE 15.1
Time management: The prioritization, scheduling,
and execution of daily responsibilities to a level of
personal satisfaction. Effective time management
does not mean you have more time; it means you
make better use of the time you have.
Chapter 15
312
tion will result in something bad down the road. As a
defense mechanism, mismanagement of time is actually
considered a good quality.
Scott also cites several myths people harbor with respect
to the feasibility of effective time-management skills.
One myth is the illusion that time is an adjustable, rather
than fi xed, variable and that there are more than
24 hours in a day. This perception suggests that there
will always be “more time” to get a job done. A second
myth, perhaps based on one’s prior experience, is that
time-management techniques just don’t work. This
perception arises when specifi c time-management skills
are used individually instead of collectively and then
fail to meet expectations. Another common perception
is that a methodical strategy to organize oneself is unexciting
and even boring, compared to the stimulation of
a crisis orientation. In other words, some people (e.g.,
codependents) thrive on crisis management.
Personality Styles and Behaviors
To try to understand the attitudes that become obstacles
to effi cient time management, scholars have also
targeted behaviors that infl uence one’s personality as a
whole. Six distinct personality behaviors have become
evident. These are Type A’s, workaholics, time jugglers,
procrasti nators, perfectionists, and those who
fall into lifestyle traps. These behaviors are labeled
“time robbers,” or time wasters, because they steal
valuable time rather than promote effective time
usage. Although these behaviors are listed separately,
it should be noted that the personalities of some people
include many of these behaviors, making effective
time management even more elusive.
1. Type A personality. Type A personality is thought
to comprise several dominating behaviors: time
urgency (a rush to meet deadlines), anger/hostility
(explosive aggression), lack of planning (poor
organization skills), and polyphasia (preoccupation
with many thoughts at one time). Although
time urgency might seem to be the target behavior
for effi cient time management, the combination
of all four factors contributes to ineffi cient
use of time. People who exhibit traits of Type A
behavior may appear to be organized and productive,
but studies indicate that Type A individuals
are less organized and complete no more
work than their Type B counterparts, and their
work is often of lower quality.
2. Workaholism. Workaholics spend grossly excessive
amounts of time working ( FIG. 15.3   ).
Workaholism is considered a process addiction
wherein self-validation is received from prolonged
working hours to maintain a sense of importance
or self-esteem (Robinson, 2007). Whereas the average
person may spend 8 hours a day at work, the
workaholic spends 10 to 14 hours. Workaholics
spend time doing many little tasks between 9 and
5, then feel the need to stay longer to get the big
projects completed. They tend to shy away from
time-saving techniques and productivity measures
because these threaten the security of their selfconfi
dence-building strategy. Workaholics may
(Cornered ©1997 Mike Baldwin.
Reprinted with permission of
Universal Press Syndicate. All rights reserved.)
FIGURE 15.2
Type A personality: A time-conscious (aggressive)
personality that, in terms of time management,
rushes to meet deadlines.
Workaholism: A personality style that inhibits
good time-management skills with excessive hours
devoted to work, often at the expense of other
responsibilities.
Resource Management: Managing Time and Money
313
complain about the excessive time they spend on
work, but the simple truth is, long hours give them
great pleasure.
3. Technophile. Cell phones, iPods, WiFi, laptops,
text messaging, MySpace.com, the Internet, and
new technologies that have yet to come on the market
are great and can certainly save time, but they
can also rob you blind when it comes to time management.
What is a device of convenience for some
is an addiction for many. Technophiles spend
countless hours with their computers, and although
they may give the impression of high effi ciency,
don’t be fooled. The clock is ticking and time often
runs out for other important responsibilities
including spouses, families, and sleep.
4. Time juggler. A time juggler is someone who tries
to do more than one thing at a time. An example
might be someone who shaves or puts on make-up
with one hand while making a call on the car phone
with the other hand, leaving the knees to handle
the steering wheel. Time jugglers also schedule
themselves to be at more than one place at a time
and make cameo appearances at both or skip one
altogether with an award-winning excuse. Time
jugglers overbook and double-book appointments
in hopes that something might be canceled. In any
case, a time juggler is someone who bargains for
time and quite often loses: Many responsibilities
get dropped in the juggling process.
5. Procrastinator. Procrastination is a diversion tactic.
Procrastinators avoid responsibilities and put off
until tomorrow what should have been done today.
There are three factors associated with procrastination:
laziness or apathy, fear of failure, and need
for instant gratifi cation. Scholars of time management
classify procrastinators as follows:
a. Straightforward procrastinator. Someone who
knowingly does something other than the job
at hand, like going to a ball game or movie
rather than studying for an exam.
b. Deceptive procrastinator. Someone who takes
a stab at a task (e.g., fi ling taxes or creating a
résumé), but fi nds excuses to drift away from
completion of it until the last minute. On the
surface, it looks like progress is being made,
but it is a deception.
c. Time-trap procrastinator. Doing the less diffi
cult tasks rather than required ones (e.g.,
cleaning, washing the car, or walking the dog
before completing homework or term papers).
The result here is that there is not enough
time for a quality job, and these procrastinators
then feel like they are painted into a corner
with the clock ticking. In addition, other
responsibilities are neglected while completing
the required task at the last minute.
6. Perfectionist. A perfectionist is someone who is
obsessed with carrying out every task and responsibility
to perfection. Although aiming for quality
Putting in extra time after
hours does not always indicate
increased productivity. It may, in fact, be a sign of
wasted time during the working day.
FIGURE 15.3
Time juggler: Someone who multitasks, overbooks,
and double-books oneself and bargains for time,
often dropping responsibilities in the process.
Procrastinator: Someone who employs diversions
and avoidance techniques rather than tackling a
host of responsibilities.
Straightforward procrastinator: A person who
knowingly avoids completing a task.
Deceptive procrastinator: Someone who attempts
to work on projects, but only scratches the surface,
stalling on the completion of tasks.
Time-trap procrastinator: A person who does other
tasks, such as laundry, thus keeping busy while still
avoiding the more important responsibilities.
Perfectionist: A person who is obsessed with the
details of every task, aiming for quality, yet who
ends up getting caught up with the details and
missing the whole picture.
Chapter 15
314
is an admirable attribute, the perfectionist gets
too caught up in the details and never sees the
whole picture. Thus, projects (or other aspects of
life) are compromised. Evidence shows that about
20 percent of all human acts are mistakes. Total
perfection is an illusion; it does not exist. But the
perfectionist deceives him- or herself by thinking
it is possible.
7. Lifestyle behavior trap. People who fall into this
category are individuals who have a hard or
impossible time saying no. These individuals,
who show many codependent traits, are extremely
nice people. They receive validation of
their self-worth by helping other people, often at
the expense of their own needs. These people take
on inappropriate responsibilities (e.g., house sitting,
feeding the neighbor’s cat, driving someone
to the airport), often for approval or acceptance to
build self-esteem. They may even volunteer for
responsibilities they have not been asked to do.
But feelings of victimization may result after the
task is completed, when just a thank-you is not
enough and self-esteem is not enhanced.
Steps to Initiate Good
Time-Management Techniques
Effective time management can be broken down into
three skills: prioritization, scheduling, and execution.
1. Prioritization. Prioritization means ranking responsibilities
and tasks in their order of importance.
Before this can be done, however, a list of all current
responsibilities must be made (see workbook
Exercise 15-3). List making is an invaluable skill in
one’s time-management strategy. The following
three methods are advocated:
a. The ABC rank-order method involves assigning
the letters A, B, or C to various responsibili-
Lifestyle behavior trap: A behavior in which
people have a hard time saying no and end up overwhelmed
with multiple responsibilities.
Prioritization: The fi rst of three aspects necessary
in effective time management, for which tasks are
given priority for completion.
ABC rank-order method: A time-management technique
for which things are prioritized by order of
importance.
Stress with a Human Face
The train schedules
are so precise
in Germany
it is said that you
can set your watch by them. Bernhard not only sets his
watch by the trains when he returns home to Frankfurt, but
also keeps his eye on the plane schedule. Bernhard, you
see, is an executive at Lufthansa Airlines, which itself has
a pretty good eye on the time departure schedule. Bernhard
came to the United States to obtain his MBA. While in
graduate school, he learned to master a precise time schedule
that included his studies, family time with his baby boy
Philip, and his arduous triathlon training, which in itself
could be a full-time job. Bernhard’s dream was to qualify
and compete in the Hawaiian Ironman competition, a goal
he accomplished in 1998. After returning home to Germany
and taking a job with Lufthansa, he was soon transferred
back to the United States to head up the company’s North
American regional headquarters.
New York City is a far cry from Frankfurt, and it’s fair to
say that no one sets their watches by the New York subway
schedule. In fact, there are constant jokes about
what “a New York min ute” really is. Despite the culture
shock, traffi c, typical congestion, and repeated terrorism
alerts you would expect to fi nd in the Big Apple,
Bernhard has adapted quite well. He organizes his affairs
for the next day each night before he goes to bed. He
uses technology—cell phones and email—to serve him
rather than become a slave to them. He creates healthy
boundaries between work and his personal life. He also
carves out quality time with his wife Netti and his two
children, Philip and Sophie, and makes time to do his
cardio workouts as well. Equally important, Bernhard
sets aside dedicated vacation time so that his hard work
is balanced by his hard play time. Bernhard will tell you
that Germans as a rule are indeed punctual, a trait he
fi nds very benefi cial in a rapidly changing world—and a
survival skill necessary for all people.
Resource Management: Managing Time and Money
315
ties: A for the highest-priority activities (must
do immediately), B for second-priority activities
(anything that is not A or C but you should
do soon), and C for low-priority tasks or things
you would like to do (can wait to do). In this
method of prioritization, once a list of responsibilities
has been made and a letter assigned to
each item, rewrite the list in this new order and
complete the tasks in the same order.
b. The Pareto principle states that 20 percent of
the tasks we do give 80 percent of the rewards
or satisfaction (Reh, 2008). Also referred to as
the 80/20 Rule, this principle suggests that individuals
should focus on one or two signifi -
cant tasks that are worth the time invested in
them. According to this principle, out of every
ten responsibilities listed, only two will produce
recognizable gains. These tasks should
be given attention and time. (These two tasks
will most likely fall in the A category, suggesting
that completion of C, and even B, items
may prove unfruitful in the long run.)
c. Sometimes it is diffi cult to differentiate among
responsibilities, all of which seem important,
what to do fi rst. One answer is to employ
Stephen Covey’s important-versus-urgent
method (Box 15.1) as highlighted in his bestselling
book The 7 Habits of Highly Effective
People. Divide your responsibilities for the
day (or week) into four boxes. Note that people
tend to direct their energies toward box
IV (Not urgent, Not important) because these
responsibilities look quick, easy, and perhaps
enjoyable. Covey suggests that one’s overriding
attention should go to the box labeled II
(Important but not Urgent) because this will
yield the highest results. Box I (Important and
Urgent) needs adequate time, but this is not
where the majority of your attention should
be placed, for it will only lead to a reactionary
lifestyle. Covey suggests that it’s not time that
needs to be managed but ourselves that need
attention. Quadrant II is the key to effective
personal management.
2. Scheduling (Box 15.2). Scheduling is time allocation
for prioritized responsibilities, or the skill of
matching a specifi c task or responsibility with a
designated time period in which to accomplish it.
Time-management experts use the three-C’s
method and the three-P’s method for scheduling.
The three-C’s method consists of clocks, the designation
of time periods for short-term time management;
calendars, for weekly, monthly, and even
yearly forecasts of goals and responsibilities; and
completion times/dates of designated goals and
responsibilities. The three-P’s method is planning,
implementing a schedule of tasks; priorities, doing
a regular check on the relative importance of tasks;
and perhaps most important, pacing, or the rate at
which each task is performed. The following
scheduling techniques are advocated. Remember,
though, that fl exibility in scheduling is essential, or
these time-management techniques will cause
stress rather than reduce it.
a. Boxing. The concept of boxing involves breaking
down your daily waking hours into 3- to
5-hour chunks or boxes of time such as morning,
afternoon, and evening. In each time box,
you designate a specifi c responsibility. Boxing
is primarily geared toward big projects that
necessitate large blocks of time (e.g., yard
work, term papers, and other major projects).
Example:
8–9 a.m. Term
9–10 a.m. paper
10–11 a.m. research
11–12 noon at library
12–1 p.m. Lunch/exercise
1–2 p.m. Word
2–3 p.m. process
3–4 p.m. paper
}}
Pareto principle: Also known as the 80/20 Rule,
this time-management technique prioritizes tasks
by the satisfaction factor.
Important-versus-urgent method: A prioritization
time-management technique in which tasks are
categorized.
Scheduling: The second of three aspects necessary
in effective time management, for which prioritized
tasks are scheduled for completion.
Boxing: A scheduling technique used in time management
for which the day is divided into 3- to
5-hour chunks of time devoted to accomplishing
big projects.
Chapter 15
316
Prioritizing
To Do List
Date:
Write down all the things you need to get done today, with no regard for order.
1. 6.
2. 7.
3. 8.
4. 9.
5. 10.
ABC Rank-Order Method
Direction: In column A, list all the things that you must get done as soon as possible. In column C, list all the things
that you would like to do but that are not essential. In column B, put everything else.
A B C
Organize your list of things to do in the important-versus-urgent matrix:
Importance
Low Importance High Importance
High III. A. I. A.
Urgency B. B.
C. C.
Urgency
Low IV. A. II. A.
Urgency B. B.
C. C.
Then begin to work on these tasks in the following order:
I. A. III. A.
B. B.
C. C.
II. A. IV. A.
B. B.
C. C.
BOX 15.1 Time-Management Skills Worksheet
Resource Management: Managing Time and Money
317
b. Time mapping. Time mapping is similar to
boxing, but with this strategy, the day is broken
down into very small blocks of time, usually
about quarter- to half-hour segments.
Specifi c tasks (e.g., drafting a letter, making a
phone call, running a quick errand) are designated
for specifi c times:
9 a.m.—Meet with boss, pass in budget report
9:15 a.m.—Mail letters
9:30 a.m.—Phone Atlanta
9:45 a.m.—Pick up book at library
10:00 a.m.—Pick up résumés at printer
c. Clustering. When you orchestrate your own responsibilities,
it’s known as clustering. When
life frantically throws several responsibilities
at you at once, it’s known as a “cluster” expletive.
Clustering is a scheduling technique for
the completion of errands outside the house or
offi ce. Responsibilities are listed and then clustered
or mapped out by location. Clustering is
a time-saving device allowing the individual
to complete errands in close proximity to one
another rather than ricochet around town.
As you can see, prioritization and scheduling are
partners. At the end of each day, look at your list
to see which tasks weren’t fi nished and then
reprioritize your responsibilities for the next day.
3. Execution (workbook Exercise 15.5). The execution
of responsibilities is a systematic progression
of steps taken toward the satisfactory completion
of each task. More specifi cally, execution can be
described as the implementation of an established
schedule. A prioritized schedule is like a blueprint
or military strategy. The most effective
method of execution is the establishment of goals.
Here are some tips to improve execution:
a. Assign a deadline (goal) for each task or project.
b. Break large projects down into smaller tasks,
and assign a deadline for each task.
c. Work on one section or task at a time. Work
on it until it is complete. Experts indicate that
it is better to have one or two completed tasks
than a handful of unfi nished ones.
d. Reward your accomplishments with small
pleasures to motivate yourself to accomplish
designated goals. Avoid immediate gratifi cation,
though. In other words, reward yourself
after satisfactory completion of each job, not
before.
Additional Time-Management Ideas
The following are some additional ideas that don’t fall
into any specifi c category but are nevertheless helpful in
managing your time effectively:
Scheduling
Once you have a solid idea of what needs to get done,
there are several choices you can make about scheduling
your responsibilities. If you have a few major projects
to do, try the boxing method.
Boxing
Divide your day into fi ve parts: morning, noon hour,
afternoon, dinner hour, and evening. Then, write down
the signifi cant tasks and assign them a block of time
that is most suited to your schedule.
8–12 noon
12–1 Lunch (perhaps
do some small errands)
1–6
6–7 Dinner (exercise)
7–10
Remember: To be effective you will want to take small
breaks during these large blocks of time.
BOX 15.2 Time-Management Skills
Time mapping: A time-management technique;
breaking down the day into 15- to 30-minute
segments and assigning a task or responsibility to
each segment.
Clustering: A scheduling technique used in time
management for which errands are grouped by location
(e.g., dry cleaners, post offi ce, pharmacy).
Execution: The third of three aspects essential
for effective time management, in which tasks are
actually completed.
Chapter 15
318
1. Delegation. The old adage “If you want something
done right, you have to do it yourself ” can
lend itself to stress if you feel you have to do everything
yourself. Many people dislike delegating
responsibilities; it is equated with loss of control
and personal identity. Delegation involves trusting
yourself to relinquish control, as well as trusting
the individuals to whom you delegate the
responsibilities. In many cases, items marked as B
or C on your To Do list can be delegated to or
shared with other people. When you delegate
responsibilities, explain instructions clearly and
assign a completion time or date to each task.
Avoid delegating responsibilities for which the
time to explain the task exceeds the time to complete
it. Follow-up is a crucial component of delegation
to prevent reverse delegation, wherein the
task comes back to you unfi nished.
2. Schedule interruptions. One time-management
technique advocated by experts is to be fl exible
with your work schedule. Offi ce visits, phone
calls, meetings, and 2-hour “power lunches” can
become distractions and interrupt your work
when they are not expected. Resulting feelings of
frustration, impatience, and anger can contribute
to the pressures of task completion. If you allow
for a small number of interruptions of your day,
however ( FIG. 15.4   ), anger and hurriedness
can be minimized. Experts suggest that interruptions
should actually be scheduled into your daily
activities by allotting them 7 to 10 minutes per
hour. Conversely, interruptions should also be
prevented during crucial time periods when continuity
of work fl ow is paramount. Taking the
phone off the hook, closing the offi ce door, or
leaving the worksite when distractions are
unavoidable may be necessary.
3. Schedule personal time in each day. Experts agree
that a day fi lled to the brim with career and family
responsibilities, leaving no time for oneself,
results in burnout and possibly disease and illness.
Your health should be a high priority. Time allocated
for a walk, jog, or meditation alone is crucial
to the effectiveness of carrying out personal
responsibilities. But health is often taken for
granted until illness occurs. So, keep your health
a top priority. As Ben Franklin once said, “An
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.”
4. An idea book. An idea book, like a journal, is a
place to record various ideas that surface to the
conscious mind. Often important thoughts fl ash
into the conscious mind at the most inopportune
moments. The mind has limited awareness, with
many thoughts competing for attention. An idea
book, like a second brain, can become a receptacle
for a multitude of important thoughts. Once written
down, you can refer back to them at any time.
An idea book can include To Do lists, dream lists,
names and phone numbers, or any other idea you
don’t want to forget.
5. Edit your life. This journalistic phrase is used here
as a personal house-cleaning technique. (It is also
known as the emptying process of spiritual wellbeing.)
Despite the fact that civilization has progressed
light-years since the days when people lived
in caves, we have not lost the Neanderthal trait of
hunting and gathering possessions. Whether
ma terial in nature or not, we tend to carry around a
lot of excess baggage. In the editing process, a regular
assessment of physical, mental, emotional, and
spiritual needs is conducted. This includes an objective
evaluation of relationships, values, and personal
needs. Once you have listed your various needs,
Good time management requires
you to balance your life between
work and leisure. Remember that balance is essential
for optimal well-being.
FIGURE 15.4
Delegation: Relinquishing control of a responsibility
by turning it over to someone else.
Resource Management: Managing Time and Money
319
decide which factors in your life are essential or core
to your life, and which factors are peripheral ones
draining your energy. Then, let go of the ones you
feel are draining off valuable time and energy. The
editing process, then, is a technique by which you
reduce your life to its simplest terms. In the book
The Dove, a true story of a teenager who sailed
around the world by himself, author Robin Lee
Graham said, “It’s not how much I need to survive,
it’s how little I need to survive.”
6. Networking skills. Tracking down resources to
accomplish tasks can be a time waster if the time
it takes to access the resource exceeds its importance.
In many cases, people are resources. There
is a saying in the business world: “It’s not what
you know but who you know.” In reality, time
management requires a combination of the two
because all the connections in the world will not
help without a brain to use them. Connections are
important, and networking is the establishment
of solid connections. Learn who can help you
accomplish the satisfactory completion of tasks
that cannot be done alone. Learn who you can
rely on for help, whether you need an important
phone number, to borrow a truck, or a helping
hand to move to a new apartment.
7. Organizational skills. Although some people think
that organizational skills are innate, the truth is
that, with practice, anybody can learn strong
organizational skills to increase personal productivity.
The following tips will help to sharpen
your organizational skills:
a. Some people receive up to 100 email messages
a day. Reading and responding to these can
become a full-time job. Here is a tip: If emails
are a stressor in your life, delete all the forwarded
emails to save time for those that are
really important.
b. Once used in cars for emergencies, cell phones
can now be found attached to anyone’s ear
practically anywhere rather than just for emergencies.
Make it a habit to limit cell phone use
to practical hours and turn off the phone while
at the movies, restaurants, classrooms, and
other inappropriate places.
c. Much time is wasted looking for items that
seem to have fallen into a black hole. Precious
time can be saved by designating a place for
bills, assignments, budget sheets, and so forth,
and keeping these items where they belong.
d. Learn what resources are available to help you
complete what you need to get done, including
fellow students as study partners.
e. Learn where these resources are, and when
you can use them.
f. Make a master chart including a list of deadlines,
or coursework responsibilities with a
time limit attached to them. Update the list
regularly.
g. Buy a master calendar or daily planner and
write down all your deadlines to get a comprehensive
picture of the events in your life.
Learn to look at the entire week, and then the
entire month to get a wider perspective. Then,
zoom in and focus on immediate as well as
long-term needs.
h. Learn to make outlines of projects, papers,
lectures, and proposals—introduction, development,
conclusions.
i. Keep fi les of letters (both incoming and outgoing)
to refer to when you need to get in touch
with someone. Also, regardless of what letter
or paper crosses your desk, handle it once.
Studies show that when mail is opened and
stacked to be responded to, the more times
that it is looked at, the longer it takes to get
done. Handle it once and be done with it.
j. Learn when people you need to contact are
available. Learn/remember to tell others where
you are or when you can be reached.
k. Learn/recognize your physical/mental limitations.
Learn how to say no to people who plead
for time you don’t have (e.g., I’m sorry, but I
simply don’t have time). Be gentle but fi rm!
Learn when to say no to people who plead for
time you don’t have.
l. A lot of time can be spent on the Internet
(this might actually be a great time to practice
Networking: Establishing and nurturing personal
and professional relationships to assist with the
completion of personal responsibilities.
Chapter 15
320
diaphragmatic breathing). Addiction to the
Internet is no laughing matter. Monitor your
computer usage time and if it exceeds 2 to
3 hours a day (outside of work), consider limiting
it to a respectable amount.
8. Balance. All work and no play means poor work
quality. Balance your life between work and play.
Don’t place all your self-esteem eggs in one
basket.
True to the Puritan ethic that “worth equals work,”
Americans, by and large, spend an inordinate amount
of time at their jobs. According to the International
Labour Organization, the additional hours that
Americans work each week amounts to an extra week
of work each year (Moyers, 2003). Experts detect a cultural
shift with professionals working longer hours and
taking less vacation time out of fear for job security
(Kinsman, 2006). Because of corporate downsizing and
restructuring, people are more inclined not to use their
entire vacation time, for fear that if they take time off
from their job, they might be next in line to leave permanently.
Time-management expert Jeff Davidson
notes that not only do more people spend more time at
work, but they also tend to sleep fewer hours, resulting
in feelings of fatigue and irritability while on the job.
Davidson also notes that as we continue to wallow in
the throes of the information age, we tend to become
suffocated in information, from junk mail to the
Internet. The following are some additional tips on
managing your time more effectively:
1. Watch less television. Television is defi nitely a time
robber. People say they watch TV to relax, but
what is really happening is that they are substituting
one form of sensory stimulus for another.
And because of the addictive nature of television
watching, even though you may plan to watch
only one half-hour show, you may end up sitting
in front of the television for the entire evening,
wasting the night away.
2. Change your Internet home page to Google. Hightech
gadgets are great, but they can certainly
become huge distractions and result in getting little
done. One distraction is the home page of
Internet service providers, chock full of ads and
trite news headlines. Consider changing this
home page to Google to minimize distractions
and focus your mind on what really needs to get
done. Set healthy boundaries for time spent surfing
the Web.
3. Clean your offi ce, room, desk, or work space once a
week. Things tend to accumulate rather quickly
in the course of a week. Mail, books, papers, and
odds and ends all take up space. They also compete
for your attention. Using what Davidson
calls the “urge to purge,” don’t be afraid to throw
away those things you know no longer serve you.
By making a habit of clearing off your desk and
work space, you will not only spend less time
searching for things throughout the week, but at
the same time start the cleansing process in your
mind to focus on your work.
4. Get a good night’s sleep every night. The average
recommended time for sleep is between 6 and
8 hours a night. When we get pressed for time,
the allocation of time for sleeping is often the fi rst
thing cut. In the short term, what may seem like
a clever idea to cram for an exam, write a paper,
or fi nish a project is in the long run an invitation
to disaster. Although scientists who study sleep
do not agree why adequate sleep is necessary, they
all agree that sleep is essential to our health and
well-being (Maas, 2001). Denying ourselves adequate
sleep not only affects the quality of the
work we do the next day, but ultimately affects
the quality of our health as well.
5. Create personal boundaries, and honor them. Boundaries
are those invisible lines we draw around
ourselves to keep our identity and give structure
to our lives. Just as it is important to be fl exible
and go with the fl ow when working with the element
of time, it is equally important to honor personal
boundaries, both yours and those of other
people in your life. Honoring boundaries includes
knowing when to leave the library, offi ce, worksite,
or friend’s house and call it a day. By honoring
your boundaries, you maintain a sense of
personal integrity. When boundaries are not honored,
feelings of victimization surface, and these
too can have a negative impact on the quality and
quantity of the work you do.
6. Do one activity at a time. In this day and age, it is
easy to get caught up doing many things at once,
like sending a fax while talking on the phone, or
Resource Management: Managing Time and Money
321
writing a term paper while watching the football
playoffs. Dividing your attention between two or
more activities results in less quality in the work
done. It wastes time as well. Learn to focus yourself
by doing one task at a time.
7. Learn and practice the art of decision making. We
are constantly faced with choices in both our personal
and professional lives—where to eat, what
movie to see, what topic to present, or what job to
take. Decision making requires a good sense of
judgment, coupled with a sense of compassion.
Some decisions can be made rather quickly,
whereas those with long-term implications need
more time to survey and process. When we have
big decisions to make, we tend to drag our feet
and, in the information age, it is not hard to
become overwhelmed with tidbits of facts and
fi gures. In the words of Davidson, more choices
mean more decisions. He suggests that we avoid
being overwhelmed by learning to limit our
choices and, hence, the decisions that come from
too many choices.
Best Application of
Time-Management Skills
Time-management skills can appear overwhelming and
stress producing if they are seen as dogmatic and rigid.
Use of time-management skills should be proportional to
the number of responsibilities one assumes. In all likelihood,
you are already fairly adept at these time-management
techniques and may even use some of them in your
normal working schedule. It is during periods when
responsibilities accumulate beyond normal that these
techniques may assist in your overall coping strategy.
Before you begin to apply these techniques, fi rst inventory
your attitudes and behavior styles for the roadblocks
listed earlier in the chapter. See if you can relate to any
factors that sabotage efforts to get tasks accomplished on
time. Then experiment with the techniques to fi nd out
which work best for you. After employing these techniques,
evaluate their effectiveness. It is fair to say that
virtually all other stress-management skills hinge on time
management, for without adequate time allocated to
rethink strategies to deal with stress or practice relaxation
techniques, learning them serves no lasting purpose.
Chapter 15
322
  Time and money are considered the two primary
resources necessary to navigate the shoals of a stressful
life, but people tend to waste both, resulting in a
personal shipwreck.
  Financial responsibility means making a budget and
following it rather than spending money you don’t
have and accruing a mass of credit card debt. There
are many ways to incorporate fi scal management
into your life that can reduce personal stress.
  Time is a human-made concept. Calendars and time
zones were created to bring organization to cultures
and civilizations that needed to coordinate activities.
  Although the concept of time was created to help
organize, people often fi nd themselves becoming
slaves to the clock, and hence become stressed by it.
  Time management is defi ned as the ability to prioritize,
schedule, and execute responsibilities to personal
satisfaction. Time-management skills are now
taught to people to help them gain a sense of control
over personal responsibilities.
  There are several roadblocks to effective time management,
which impede productivity and, in essence,
rob us of valuable time. They include Type A
personality, workaholism, time juggling, procrastination,
and lifestyle behavior trapping.
  Three methods of prioritization are the ABC rankorder
method, the Pareto principle, and the important-
versus-urgent method.
  Recommended scheduling techniques are boxing,
time mapping, and clustering.
  The execution of personal responsibilities is the last
step of time management. Setting goals and providing
rewards can be powerful incentives to fi nishing
the task at hand.
  Additional tips to help manage time better are delegating
responsibilities, scheduling interruptions and
personal time each day, using an idea book, editing
your life to the bare essentials, and using networking
and strong organizational skills.
1. List the four rules for fi nancial stability.
2. Describe the psychology of money.
3. What personality styles undermine one’s timemanagement
skills?
4. Explain the following time-management concepts:
the Pareto principle, boxing, time mapping,
and clustering.
5. List fi ve strategies for effective time management
to decrease stress.
SUMMARY
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
Additional
Coping
Techniques
One cannot collect
all the beautiful
shells on the beach,
one can collect
only a few.
—Anne Morrow Lindbergh
Chapter 16
Additional Coping Techniques
325
According to several psychologists, just as there
are many shells on the beach, there are hundreds
of coping techniques. Some fall nicely
into well-defi ned categories; others do not but
are every bit as important in their function and outcome.
Much like acquiring a personal collection of seashells,
chances are you will choose a handful of coping strategies
for your own stress-management program and leave the
rest behind. And just as a return to the beach may inspire
you to pick up a new shell, which at another time seemed
unattractive or banal, a new encounter with stress may
entice you to select a new method of coping. This chapter
outlines some additional coping techniques that are often
used to deal with stress effectively. Although they may
not serve as your fi rst line of defense in every case, at some
point in your life you may fi nd them very helpful.
Information Seeking
Fear of the unknown accompanies many formidable
stressors, from job interviews to cancer diagnoses. Several
circumstances we encounter are perceived as threats
because of our lack of information about the event. Lack of
information allows the mind to fi ll in missing pieces with
hypothetical facts or worst-case scenarios, which often perpetuates
the stress response. To conquer fear of the
unknown, gathering information about a specifi c circumstance
becomes one of the best defenses against stressors.
Information seeking involves collecting and processing
facts about a stressful event or situation, which can then be
used to help solve the problem and regain emotional stability.
As suggested by psychologist Shelly Taylor (2005), the
gathering and processing of information also allows mastery
of control because knowledge can become a powerful
tool with which to confront and dismantle a stressor.
Information seeking has been found to be an essential
skill following diagnosis of terminal illness, in the recovery
process of alcoholics and drug abusers, during pregnancy,
and for any other stressor that makes an
unpredictable change in your life, however big or small.
When encountering stress, people pose many questions
in an attempt to gain a handle on the unknown. When an
individual contracts a disease such as cancer, multiple
sclerosis, or atherosclerosis, all attention becomes focused
on gathering answers to a host of questions. What is the
nature of this disease? How did I contract it? What is the
best method to manage it? Similarly, when your car
breaks down, a set of questions runs through your mind.
What’s wrong with the engine or transmission? How
long will it take to fi x? How much will it cost? Can I
afford this? Or academic stressors: How many exams are
there in this course? What types of questions are on the
exams? How much is the term paper worth toward the
fi nal grade? Like a large jigsaw puzzle, small pieces of
information become crucial to the ability to cope with the
cause of the stress so as to assemble a wider perspective on
the whole problem as well as potential solutions.
In times of distress, questions necessitate answers, and
there are many resources that are typically accessed to
provide answers. The three most common references
are people, books, and the Internet. An individual
becomes a reference when he or she appears to be “in
the know” about a certain situation, either because of
personal experience or the acquisition of knowledge
pertaining to your situation. Usually when information
is disseminated through people, however, facts are
intertwined with emotional perceptions. As a result, the
objectivity of this information must be assessed very
carefully. Believe it or not, not all information in the
world is located on the Internet. Although surfi ng topics
on any search engine is a good place to start to seek
insights on various issues, your search shouldn’t end
there. A lot of valuable information can be found only
by talking to people directly. Books, journals, magazines,
the Internet, and newspapers are also valuable
sources of information on virtually every topic known,
often offering several viewpoints ( FIG. 16.1   ). The
Information seeking: A common coping technique;
searching for detailed information to increase awareness
about a situation that has become a perceived
threat.
Never underestimate the power of
support groups. (©2000 Randy
Glasbergen. www.glasbergen.com.)
FIGURE 16.1
Chapter 16
326
use of these references to cope with stress even has its
own name: bibliotherapy.
Like other coping techniques, though, information
seeking can be a liability as well as an asset. Too much
information can be as detrimental as too little because it
can feed the imagination to create worst-case scenarios,
which are then adopted as reality. Nevertheless, when
you are confronted with a stressor that promotes fear of
the unknown, information seeking can be your best
strategy to begin to cope with this problem.
Social Orchestration
Perhaps the most common response to events or circumstances
that elicit the stress response is avoidance. Whereas
avoidance of life-threatening events such as fi re is wise,
avoidance of mental, emotional, and spiritual threats is not
a viable option. Avoidance is a defense mechanism deeply
rooted in the ancient fl ight response. It is popularly believed
that if we avoid situations that cause fear or frustration, our
lives will become simple and stress free. But what may
seem like a quick fi x offers no permanent resolution, only
further problems down the road. Avoidance is a negative
coping style, especially when the stressors involve relationships
and human confrontation.
Can you make educated choices about how to minimize
stressful situations? Yes! The answer is social orchestration
(formerly called social engineering, a term that has
now been adopted by political and technological fi elds to
mean “mass societal infl uence” or “obtaining confi dential
information by manipulating people”). Social orchestration
is a positive coping style designed to help minimize
stress by following a path of least resistance, but not avoidance.
Social orchestration involves analyzing a problem,
creating a series of viable options, and then choosing the
best option to resolve feelings and perceptions of stress. It
is also described as a reorganization process wherein individuals
manipulate factors and elements (not people) in
their environment to their best advantage.
There are two approaches to the social orchestration
pro cess. The fi rst is to change factors in your environment
that can cause stress. If this is not a viable option,
Stress with a Human Face
Curiosity is one of humanity’s
noblest traits. And
for every dan ger ous situation
that may result from
too much inquisitiveness
there are ten times the number of stories that result in
personal victories. None, however, is as compelling as
that of Augusto and Michaela Odone, which is the epitome
of information seeking as a coping strategy.
The story began in 1984, when their son, Lorenzo, then
6 years old, was sent home from school for displaying
hyperactive behavior. As days turned into months, additional
symptoms appeared, and eventually Lorenzo was
diagnosed with the newly named and little understood
adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), a lethal genetic disease of
dysfunctional nerve tissue, resulting from an extremely
high number of very long fatty-acid chains in the blood.
Lorenzo was given a maximum of 2 years to live.
But his parents did not accept Lorenzo’s death sentence.
Upon learning of the prognosis for their son, they took
turns going to the National Library of Medicine to
research ALD and staying home to care for Lorenzo.
With persistence, willpower, luck, and what Augusto
calls a “whole lot of love,” their search for clues not
only enlightened the medical community about the
dynamics involved in the etiology of the disease, but
led to the creation of a medication, Lorenzo’s Oil, which
arrested the progression of the disease. Lorenzo’s Oil is
now used to treat this disease in children all over the
world.
A lawyer for the World Bank, Augusto has earned an honorary
doctorate in medicine for his achievement. Now
hundreds of children are living normal lives thanks to the
inquisitive nature of Augusto and Michaela Odone. But in
the words of Augusto, “I wouldn’t like it that people think
our efforts were out of intellectual curiosity. This is a
story of love.” Lorenzo Odone lived a triumphant life for
two more decades after he was fi rst striken with ALD, giving
inspiration to many who have also been diagnosed
with this disease. He died on May 30, 2008.
Social orchestration: A coping technique; either
(1) changing stress-producing factors in the environment
or (2) changing the entire stress-producing
environment; the path of least resistance (as
distinguished from avoidance).
Additional Coping Techniques
327
your health status is at risk, and attempts at cognitive
reappraisal prove fruitless, then the second approach is
to change your environment. Changing factors in your
environment might include driving a different route to
work or blocking out time periods during the day during
which you do not answer the phone so as to get a
major task completed. In situations where you change
specifi c factors, you attempt to manipulate or control
your environment so that your encounters with potential
stressors are minimal. To change your environment
means relocating from unhealthy or intolerable living
conditions to a new setting that is conducive to better
health status. Because changing one’s environment is
both costly and time consuming, this approach is often
used as a last resort. Keep in mind that if you choose to
change your environment so as to avoid people or run
away, then this coping technique is being used improperly
and no resolution is guaranteed. Also, recall from
Chapter 1 that Holmes and Rahe found that relocating
to a new environment is a stressful experience in itself.
On a larger scale, social orchestration can be seen in many
political grass-roots efforts—lobbying Congress to pass
legislation favoring particular issues and concerns, for
example. In fact, social orchestration is the coping skill of
choice at both local and national governmental levels for
issues such as landfi lls and recycling. On a smaller scale,
social orchestration is a strategy we employ regularly with
personal chores and responsibilities, but it is an effective
one in the management of major life stressors.
A prime example of social orchestration where factors in
the environment were changed for all Americans was the
fallout from the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001.
In Manhattan, commuter train routes were disrupted for
months, as were some roads and highways leading into
the city, which changed going to and coming home from
work into a challenge. Many people learned to telecommute
and actually found they preferred this style of work.
Many businesses whose locations were either devastated
in the collapse of the World Trade Center buildings or
closed because of smoke and falling ash needed to open
temporary offi ces in outlying areas. Perhaps one of the
biggest changes that affected the U.S. population related
to air travel, when new security checks required additional
hours of time before take-off, readjusting time
schedules for everyone involved. Additional examples
include changes made by those who lost their homes during
Hurricane Katrina and the southern California wildfi
res of 2007. Whether it’s reorchestrating your life
because of a new addition to the family (e.g., new baby or
aging parents) or some world event that landed on your
doorstep, social orchestration offers a way to gain an
upper hand in the situation.
Although social orchestration is often the coping skill of
choice for large-scale issues like earthquakes and
human-made disasters, the ability to change factors in
the environment can be done at a personal level as well.
Many coping skills are used at the same time to deal
with a stressor; there is strength in numbers. Thus,
social orchestration may incorporate the use of other
coping skills, including assertiveness, cognitive restructuring,
creative problem solving, and time management.
Cognitive restructuring is essential to create a
new frame of mind in which to manipulate factors in
the environment. The following is a step-by-step process
for social orchestration:
1. Defi ne your stressors. Write down what is bothering
you by trying to describe what this stressor
really is (e.g., an obnoxious roommate, a bad marriage,
car repair problems).
2. Identify your initial response. Do you feel angry, frustrated,
afraid, impatient, or resentful? Does this
stressor cause you to worry or feel guilty? What
emotions are running through your mind? Write
these down. Next, describe what your fi rst reaction
or course of action to this stressor is (or was). Do you
feel the urge to avoid a certain person? Do the
words retaliation or avoidance come to mind? How
would you describe your fi rst course of action?
3. Generate alternatives. This is the creative stage, where
you write down any and all possible solutions. Let us
say, for example, that the route you drive to work is
under construction and now it takes you an extra
25 minutes to get there. You fi nd yourself feeling
pretty irritated with the traffi c and the fact that you
are wasting so much time. What are some viable
alternatives? Perhaps carpooling, taking a bus or
subway, leaving for work 20 minutes early, fi nding a
new route to work, working at home on a computer
with modem hook-up, or walking.
4. Choose the best alternative. Once you have a handful
of ideas that are plausible, pick the one that
seems most suited to your circumstances. Regarding
the preceding example, assume that the walk is too
far, and that there is no mass transit or potential
carpool members readily available. Working at
home with a modem hook-up sounds attractive,
and you decide to go with this plan of action. To
your surprise, your plan is approved by your boss
for 3 out of 5 work days until the road construction
Chapter 16
328
is done. So, you work at home, while miles away
road construction takes place.
5. Evaluate the outcome of your choice. In this last step,
you take a moment to analyze the option you have
chosen to measure its effectiveness. If the option is a
good one, you keep it. If not, you pick a new option
and give it a try. In the case of the road-construction
problem, it turns out that working at home seems to
require much more discipline than you realized. It
actually takes more time to get your work done
because of distractions from the refrigerator and the
television. After evaluating this option, you decide
to return to your offi ce, leaving 30 minutes earlier
than before, and this second option works fi ne.
The key to social orchestration is to provide yourself
with many viable options from which to choose. Options
are like cushions that soften the blow when a stressor
disrupts your center of gravity, causing you to fall.
People with only one option—or worse, no options—
begin to feel that a stressor is beyond control and that
they are victims of their environment. By creating and
choosing one of several options, you strengthen your
internal locus of control and get an early start on resolving
the issues at hand.
Social-Support Groups
There is an old proverb suggesting that misery loves
company. This does not mean that we wish our troubles
on others, nor does it mean that we are happy to see others
encounter the same problems we faced ourselves.
Rather, it means that when two or more people experience
a problem of daunting magnitude, the emotional
burden seems to be shared, is more bearable, and is consequently
not as heavy a load as a solo attempt at working
against the odds. This is the premise that has given
rise to the recommendation of regular social contact
and the plethora of support groups across America.
The fi rst support group to gain a foothold of respect in
the American culture was Alcoholics Anonymous
(AA Services, 2002). Since its inception more than
50 years ago, this group has helped millions of people
cope with the problems of alcohol addiction through
the care and love shared by its members. Because of its
tremendous success, the philosophy, format, traditions,
and twelve-step recovery process have been borrowed
by virtually every support group for all substance and
process addictions.
Research has also shown that feelings of connectedness,
belongingness, and bonding arising from social contact
contribute to one’s health (Ornish, 1998; Pelletier, 2000)
( FIG. 16.2   ). This is the social well-being aspect of
spiritual well-being. The desire to belong is considered a
basic human need, as was fi rst suggested by Maslow in
1943. There are several theories as to why social support
is considered an aid in the coping process. The buffer
theory, proposed by Cassel (1976), suggests that social
support acts as a buffer against stress, in that social ties
tend to fi lter out the deleterious effects of both ordinary
hassles and devastating life events. This theory is shared
by several researchers in the fi eld of health psychology,
but the exact dynamics of this buffering action are still
uncertain. Connell and D’Augelli (1990) hypothesized
that when individuals express fondness for others and
make themselves available to both receive help (succor) as
well as give help (nurturance), perceptions of stress are
signifi cantly decreased. In the compensation theory,
social support is thought to act as a compensation for
those who are at an emotional loss because of life’s stress-
Social support: A coping technique; those groups of
friends, family members, and others whose company
acts to buffer against and dissipate the negative
effects of stress.
Buffer theory: A theory that suggests that people
invited to a support group act to buffer the participants
from stress to lessen the impact.
Compensation theory: A theory suggesting that
support groups compensate for various emotional
losses one experiences during stress.
More and more, evidence points
to the idea that strong social
support from friends may act to buffer against the
ill effects of stress and add to both the quality and
quantity of life.
FIGURE 16.2
Additional Coping Techniques
329
ors. Perhaps the landmark study of the power of support
groups was designed by Spiegel and colleagues (1989).
This study showed that metastatic breast cancer patients
who were involved with a support group lived statistically
signifi cantly longer than those who did not belong
to such a group. Spiegel called this coping technique
supportive-expressive group therapy. Connectedness,
through the loving support of friends, family, and colleagues,
appears to be an essential factor for optimal
health (Ornish, 1998). The direct-effect theory, suggested
by Andrews and Tennant (1982), indicates that social
contact only provides positive exposure to the individual
and that these positive stimuli are pleasing to the ego.
Finally, the cognitive-dissonance theory states that when
individuals are engaged in social contact where values
and attitudes are similar, the collective energy far exceeds
the negative feelings experienced by any one person
individually.
Pilisuk and Parks (1986) found evidence supporting the
hypothesis that social support not only acts as a buffer
against stress, but may in fact contribute to health and longevity
by enhancing the integrity of the immune system.
Results from both the Alameda County Study (Berkman
and Syme, 1979) and the Tecumseh Commu nity Health
Study (House, Robbins, and Metzner, 1982) revealed that
social support was a signifi cant factor in both the health
status and longevity of those subjects studied. These investigations,
as well as those conducted by Kaplan and colleagues
(1988) and Berkman (1986), indicated that men
seem to benefi t more than women with regard to the
effects of social support on the progression of cardiovascular
disease. Raphael (1977) and Lowenthal and Harven
(1968) reported that social withdrawal was a signifi cant
factor in coronary mortality in bereaved spouses, most
notably men. From these and other studies, it seems that
companionship is truly a basic human need. When this
need is fi lled through the demonstration of caring, love,
and moral support, the intensity of stress is alleviated, suggesting
a greater tolerance for frustration and worry. In
their reviews of the merits of social support as a coping
technique, Brannon and Feist (1992) and Pelletier and
Herzing (1988) concluded that it is a signifi cant factor
contributing to health and longevity. Thus, its use as a
coping strategy is strongly encouraged.
Hobbies
Is there such a thing as a therapeutic escape? Perhaps.
Whereas psychologists and stress-management counselors
caution against the hazards of avoidance, the
practice of diversions has often been advocated as a bona
fi de coping strategy. Healthy diversions are any activities
that offer a temporary escape from the sensory overload
that can produce or perpetuate the stress response.
Diversions offer the conscious mind a “change of venue”
to promote clear thinking. Taking your mind off a
problem, or removing an issue from conscious attention
for a designated period of time, and diverting attention
to an unrelated subject focuses the mind and enables it
to deal better with these issues upon return. As with
most strategies, diversions offer either positive or negative
repercussions. Positive diversions are those in which
the individual takes an active role in the escape process.
(An example of a passive escape is watching television
or sleeping.) Active escapes are those that contribute to
one’s identity, character, and self-esteem. With this in
mind, the best temporary active escape is said to be a
Supportive-expressive group therapy: A term
coined by Dr. David Spiegel for women with breast
cancer to share their experiences, grief, and healing
with others going through the same experience.
Direct-effect theory: A theory suggesting that
social contact serves to provide uplifting aspects to
the individual, thus pleasure to the ego.
Cognitive-dissonance theory: A theory suggesting
that the collective energy of one’s support group
supersedes any individual’s negative experience of
stress.
The term “social support group” has taken on a whole
new meaning because of new arenas of social networking,
including MySpace.com, Facebook.com, and
other forums not yet created. In an age where the
world is at your fi ngertips (through a keypad), friends
are as close as the farthest corner of the globe. But
what constitutes a real friend? Is it merely interfacing
with a name and photo on a Web site, or is it receiving
several emails or text messages a day from acquaintances?
Nothing can replace the empathy of eye-toeye
contact and a familiar human voice, yet emails,
text messages, and the newest virtual contacts can
serve as a powerful supplement to the human connection
and evaporate feelings of loneliness. How strong
is your support group, and is there a balance between
your real and virtual worlds?
BOX 16.1 Virtual Friends in Need?
Chapter 16
330
hobby ( FIG. 16.3   ), the pursuit of a leisure interest
that provides pleasure (Kaplin, 1960). Most hobbies,
such as needlepoint, photography, and many others,
involve some degree of creativity as well as the ability to
make order out of chaos on a very small and manageable
scale. The latter factor tends to give a person a sense
of control over life, which in turn augments self-esteem.
And high self-esteem transfers from outside interests to
areas of one’s life where factors contribute to personal
stress. Moreover, the ability to bring order to a smallscale
operation, like haute cuisine cooking or bonsai
gardening, also has a carry-over effect in dealing with
larger problems. In fact, many people fi nd that their
time spent in the pursuit of hobbies transfers to solutions
for major life problems.
However, not all experts agree that hobbies are stress
relieving. Relaxation therapist Edmond Jacobson in his
book You Must Relax warned of drawbacks of hobbies,
indicating that they produce tension and frustration
when expectations are not met. Jacobson believed that
for relaxation to be most effective, the individual must
be doing absolutely nothing. In his opinion, leisure
activities—and hobbies in particular—actually compound
the accumulation of stress. His point is valid
when people focus on perfectionism rather than leisure.
When pleasure is absent from leisure activities, it is defi -
nitely time to stop and do something else.
One reason why hobbies are advocated as self-esteem
builders is that they allow you to invest yourself in several
areas. If you have a bad day at the offi ce or school,
hobbies can neutralize the negative feelings and bolster
self-esteem. In essence, self-esteem remains intact when
not all eggs are placed in one basket.
Forgiveness
Every stressor generated by anger that results in feelings
of victimization is a prime candidate for forgiveness.
Forgiveness is a cognitive process, and although it might
seem to fall in the domain of cognitive restructuring, its
signifi cance as a process merits separate recognition. In
their book Forgiveness, authors Sidney Simon and
Suzanne Simon describe acts of pardon as an essential
step in the resolution of major life stressors. When many
people hear the word forgiveness, they associate the process
with condonement, absolution, and self-sacrifi ce,
which, in the opinion of some, perpetuates feelings of victimization.
Consequently, because of the emotional pain
involved, forgiveness is not initially looked upon as a viable
option to reduce personal stress. Strange as it may
seem, holding a grudge or feelings of resentment appears
to be a form of control over the person or circumstance
involved. But these feelings are an illusion of control. The
toxicity of these thoughts sours one’s outlook on life and
eventually seeps into other aspects of one’s personality,
causing defensiveness and even more vulnerability to
stressors, perpetuating the cycle of self-victimization.
Simon and Simon paint a different picture of forgiveness
as a coping style. They describe it as an internal healing
process where self-esteem is restored through devictim-
Involvement in hobbies allows
people to make order out of
chaos on a small scale, which often transfers to
larger-scale problems. Any activity that boosts selfesteem
is thought to be worthwhile.
FIGURE 16.3
Hobby: A pleasurable pursuit or interest outside
one’s daily work responsibilities through which one
begins to make order out of chaos (e.g., botanical
gardening).
Forgiveness: A coping technique for anger-related
stressors for which a shift in attitude is adopted toward
those against whom a grudge was previously held.
Additional Coping Techniques
331
ization, where toxic thoughts and emotions are diluted
and released, and where one can begin to move on with
one’s life, not by just forgetting the past, but by coming to
terms with stressful issues to fi nd peace. As directors of
several workshops for adults who were sexually abused,
adult children of alcoholics, and people who were
divorced, Simon and Simon teach that forgiveness is not
an easy process. Based on their research, they propose six
emotional steps to work through in the process from victim
to survivor. These steps are very similar to those outlined
in the grieving process by Kübler-Ross (Chapter 4):
the denial stage, or refusal to admit you have been
wronged or taken advantage of; the self-blame stage, or
directing hurt inward and accepting other people’s
responsibility as your own; the victimization stage, or
realization that you have indeed been violated; the indignation
stage, or anger toward those you feel have violated
your personal rights; the survivor stage, or reassessing
your self-worth and beginning to feel whole again; and
fi nally, the integration stage, or forgiving and getting on
with your life. Simon and Simon agree that the major
hurdle to jump to get to the last stage is the ability to demonstrate
unconditional love toward yourself and others.
Some of the newest research on the topic of forgiveness
comes from the work of Fred Luskin (2002), the director
of the Stanford University Forgiveness Project. Luskin’s
work, based on subjects from war-torn northern Ireland,
has become the hallmark of forgiveness therapy and his
HEAL method is now being used by survivors of other
war-torn countries. Colin Tipping (2002) and Robin
Casarjian (1992), also noted experts on the topic of forgiveness,
state that one of the essential aspects of forgiveness
as a coping technique is that we must not only
forgive others but learn to forgive ourselves for our
thoughts and behaviors that are less than appropriate.
An interesting study by Friedberg, Suchday, and Shelor
(2007) supports the work of Luskin with regard to forgiveness
and heart physiology.
Dream Therapy
Since ancient times, dreams have been espoused as a
vehicle of divine communication. They have also been
valued as a tool to unravel the complexities of life in the
waking state. Although for centuries dreams have been
regarded as an intriguing aspect of human nature, their
importance to mental and emotional stability has been
neglected for quite some time. It was not until the work
of Freud that these nocturnal images produced by the
unconscious mind were considered worthy of scientifi c
investigation. Like Hippocrates in ancient Greece,
Freud discovered that dreams were closely related to
the physical symptoms many of his patients demonstrated.
It was this insight that led Freud into the study
of dreams and dream analysis.
Calling dreams “the royal road to the unconscious,”
Freud (1950) became convinced that they act to disguise
sexual desires and thought. It was his exploration in the
fi eld of dreams that paved the way to a greater scientifi c
understanding of the unconscious mind. But, whereas
Freud viewed dreams as a means to conceal conscious
thoughts, his protégé, Jung, regarded dreams as a means
to reveal a whole new language to understand human
consciousness and restore psychic balance. The work of
these two men gave birth to the modern practice of
dream therapy. Today, this work continues with dream
researchers Gayle Delaney (1988), Patrick Garfi eld
(1995), and Robert Van de Castle (1995).
The popularity of dream interpretation with the American
public waxed and waned throughout the twentieth
century in tandem with that expressed in clinical
research. But from research in this area, it has become
clear that dream analysis and the therapeutic effects of
dreams are powerful means to increase awareness of
personal issues as well as viable tools to help resolve
them ( FIG. 16.4   ). The following is a collection of
observations reported by several experts in the fi eld
about the dream process:
  Everyone dreams, though not everyone remembers
their dreams.
  For the average person, the dreams that stand out
are those that are perceived as utterly bizarre, terrifying,
or triggered by something in the course of
a day.
  The majority of dreams consist of information
received in the waking state during the previous
day or two.
  Recurring dreams represent signifi cant unresolved
issues.
  Dreams were once thought to occur only during
rapid-eye-movement (REM) periods, but are now
thought to occur during several other times in the
course of a night’s sleep.
Dream therapy: A coping technique in which
dreams, including recurring dreams, are explored
and deciphered to help understand acute or chronic
stressors.
Chapter 16
332
  Opinions vary on the issue of categorical dream
symbols (e.g., water signifying the spirit of life), but
virtually all experts agree that interpretation ultimately
resides with the person who created the
dream.
Dream therapy is a cognitive process that includes
dream interpretation, dream incubation, and lucid
dreaming. The purpose of dream therapy, which can be
done either with the assistance of a therapist who specializes
in dream therapy or by yourself, is to access a
greater share of consciousness through dream images
and symbols to clarify and resolve personal issues
(Foulkes, 1985; Flanagan, 2000).
Dream interpretation involves three phases. After writing
down the actual dream images, the fi rst step is to
fi nd any possible associations between these images and
those that take place during the waking state. The best
method is to write down brief descriptions of a dream
and then list as many associations with the symbolic
images that come to mind. For example, viewing a
plane crash from a farmer’s fi eld could be associated
with one’s career, a relationship, driving a car, or a new
diet. The more associations that can be made, the greater
the chance for a solid connection.
Dream therapist Robert Johnson, in his book Inner
Work, states that the second phase is to draw parallels
with these associations by asking yourself a series of
questions. For example, What do I have in common
with that image? Have I seen this image in my waking
state? What behavior(s) do I have that is like that portrayed
in this image? What emotional response does
this dream image elicit, and what circumstances in
everyday life elicit this same emotional response?
The third phase of the interpretation process is to select
the interpretation that seems to be most relevant to your
life at that moment. The best choice can also be made by
asking questions such as the following: What is the central
message of the dream? Did the dream have any advice or
moral to it? When choosing a dream interpretation, consider
each possibility a viable one because the ego-controlled
conscious mind tends to protect itself from that
which is unfl attering or potentially harmful to itself.
Dream expert Ann Faraday advises looking at the dream
from someone else’s perspective to allow a greater expansion
of possibilities to choose from. Then, make a selection
with your heart, not solely with your analytical mind.
Dream interpretation is still an art form, not a science,
and the true interpretation rests solely with the dreamer.
However, Johnson’s advice to get the best results is, fi rst,
to consider as an interpretation something you don’t
already know; second, to avoid interpretations that
infl ate the ego; and third, to disregard dream interpretations
that pass blame from you to someone or something
else. Also, be careful to consider only the obvious
because dream symbols look different from various perspectives.
Finally, Johnson says, dream interpretation is
useless if it is not acted upon. Each dream, no matter
how obvious its relevance, is a message—and messages
that are ignored may prolong the stress associated with
them. It is up to the dreamer to grasp the message and
resolve the issue that inspired it.
Just as dreams reveal messages to the conscious mind, they
can also be used as drills to tap the wealth of knowledge
hidden beneath consciousness for advice when dealing
with problems, a practice dating back to ancient Greece.
This process, called dream incubation, has been explored
by researcher Gayle Delaney. To incubate a dream, a person
ponders a specifi c concern or issue by asking a question
and perhaps even writing it down before going to
sleep. Upon awaking, he or she writes down whatever
images come to mind, and then follows the process of
Dream therapy experts believe
that the more we try to remember
our dreams, the better we are able to deal with
problems in our waking state.
FIGURE 16.4
Dream incubation: A process in which an idea to
be used as dream material is consciously seeded to
prompt the unconscious mind during sleep; a technique
effective to help resolve stressors.
Additional Coping Techniques
333
dream analysis to determine what information the unconscious
mind has suggested. From her research, Delaney
has found this technique to be very effective in the resolution
of stressful issues. It can be combined with journal
writing to augment the awareness process.
Lucid dreaming is the ability to enter the dream state
while still conscious. As in the practice of Jung’s active
imagination or creative visualization, in lucid dreaming
you consciously choose to add aspects of your dream
while in the waking state. In essence, you direct the
script of your dream. Lucid dreaming is often practiced
to fi nish dream fragments or to provide an ending to a
recurring dream.
When utilized effectively, dreams offer a wealth of
knowledge that begs to be addressed during the hours of
conscious thought. To ignore the advice, to waste this
resource, to leave inaccessible the knowledge of the
unconscious mind only perpetuates the perceptions, emotions,
and behaviors associated with stress. The importance
of dreams cannot be overstated; they have proved
many times over to provide a means of mental stability.
Or, as Jung stated in his book Man and His Symbols, “One
cannot afford to be naive about dreams.”
Prayer and Faith
Prayer is one of the oldest and most commonly used coping
mechanisms known to humankind. In its simplest
form, prayer is thought: a desire of the heart, and often a
call for help in what can best be described as a plea for
divine intervention. Although prayer is not synonymous
with meditation, these two processes share many similarities
in that they both initiate a process of centering,
increased concentration, and connectedness. They differ
in that as a coping technique, prayer specifi cally elicits the
element of divine intervention. It is a request, whereas
meditation can encompass many modes of thinking and
is not specifi cally limited to divine thought (see Chapter
18). Studies by Manfredi and Pickett (1987) and Koenig
(1988) report that prayer is the most common coping style
used by the elderly, especially when dealing with issues
related to death. Schafer (1992) writes that prayer can
lower anxiety, increase optimism, and instill hope in the
individual. Yet when abused, prayer can promote dependency,
escape, and even doubt.
Although there are many defi nitions of stress, one that
comes to mind with regard to spiritual well-being is
this: “Stress is a ‘perceived’ disconnection or separation
from our divine source.” The operative word is perceived,
for in the words of sages and wisdom keepers the
world over, we are never disconnected from our divine
source. It is unresolved fear and anger that creates the
illusion of separation. The premise of prayer as a coping
technique rests on faith: the belief that each person is
connected to a divine source (however this is named or
described). Faith in a higher power, the ultimate source,
can certainly be tested in times of stress.
Types of Prayer
When it comes to prayer, the styles are countless. Perhaps
most common to many people is a recited prayer (much
like a poem) that draws our attention from the self to the
higher self. American Indians dance their prayers so as to
reinforce their connection to the earth. South Africans
have an expression: When you sing, you pray twice.
There are prayers of gratitude and prayers of forgiveness.
Prayers come in many forms. The type of prayer most
commonly associated with stress is called intercessory
prayer (Dossey, 1993). Basically, this is a call for help, in
which one seeks divine guidance or, more likely, divine
intervention. Intercessory prayer is most common in two
situations. The fi rst is when you need help yourself; the
second is when you offer a prayer for the assistance of
others. Those who study the nuances of prayer describe it
Faith: An optimistic attitude adopted to cope with
stress for which one perceives a connection to something
bigger than oneself (e.g., a divine source).
Intercessory prayer: One style of prayer for which
the individual seeks assistance from a higher
(divine) source to intervene or assist with his or
her problems.
Prayer (from any denomination of
faith) is viewed as a tremendous
coping technique, particularly for fear and anxiety.
FIGURE 16.5
Chapter 16
334
as a form of energetic consciousness. In simple truth, all
thoughts are prayers.
Of Prayer and Meditation
There is a joke by comedian Lily Tomlin that goes like
this: How come when we talk to God, it’s called praying,
but when God talks to us, it’s called schizophrenia?
To some, prayer and meditation may be the same activity,
but in the strictest sense, they are not. As you will see
in Chapter 18, meditation is a clearing of the mind to
gain insight and wisdom. Praying, specifi cally intercessory
prayer, is more of a soliloquy. As the expression
goes, praying is when we talk to God, meditation is
when God talks to us. Indeed, there are times when
prayer and meditation may seem the same, and this is
all right. However, to those who study the art and science
of meditation, there are signifi cant differences, and
the two should never be considened to be the same.
The fi rst signs of stress began with Matt Pfenniger telling
his father Jack, a physician, that he woke up with double
vision. The last thing anyone suspected was a brain
tumor. But in 1994 Matt, a high school sophomore, was
diagnosed with exactly that. Actually, the diagnosis
wasn’t immediate. In fact, Matt spent a fair amount of
time in and out of hospitals. If you were to ask him, he
would tell you that he has seen more than his share of
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines. Matt’s
mother has a standing joke: “The only specialists we
didn’t consult were those in obstetrics.” Eventually the
diagnosis did reveal a brain tumor, a pineal germinoma—
a rare form of brain cancer. It also revealed cancer cells
isolated in the fl uid of Matt’s brain and spinal cord.
Matt began to receive the typical treatment: surgery followed
by radiation. At fi rst, things looked great. Ten
months later, however, a follow-up MRI showed three
golf-ball-sized metastases in the brain and one in the
spine. This time Matt was given a round of chemotherapy.
Although often effective, chemotherapy is not infallible.
It can not only kill cancer cells, but also destroy healthy
cells. And it doesn’t always work. In Matt’s case, the overall
situation simply worsened.
Both Jack and his wife Kay have a strong faith in God, and
they believe in the power of prayer. One day the couple had
an idea. They invited members of their local community in
Midland, Michigan, to come to a healing prayer service for
Matt at the hospital. Jack was delighted to see about 60 of
his fellow physicians attend and participate. What happened
next can only be described as a miracle.
“Ten days later there were no tumors,” Jack said. “I went
to the neuroradiologist and asked him if he could recheck
the fi lms to be sure that they were, indeed, Matt’s. The
shunt tube was there. The dye had been injected. They
were Matthew’s fi lms. The tumors were gone! I asked him
how this could happen, since even an abscess would not
be totally resolved in just 10 days. He said he could not
explain it.” In
sharing the good
news, Jack sent
a letter to all
the physicians
and the medical staff thanking them for their help. This
is how he explained the healing power of prayer to his
colleagues: “For those who do believe in prayer, no explanation
is necessary. For those who don’t believe in prayer,
no explanation will do.”
In Matt’s words: “I think I’m the luckiest guy in the world.
I can walk. I can talk. I can see. I have good friends. I’m
playing my four musical instruments. I’m taking electrical
engineering courses and I’m doing well. I have my family
to take care of me and a lot of people said, if my dad
wasn’t a doctor, I would have died.”
In Jack’s words: “I don’t wear my religion on my shirt
sleeve, and I still do not pray with my patients. However,
I am being forced, not only from my own experiences, but
from the science of prayer, to encourage more patients to
pray. I am a fan of Larry Dossey’s work on prayer. Did I tell
you that in 2004, Matt graduated with a master’s in electrical
engineering from the University of Michigan just
before Christmas and took a job with General Electric in
Cincinnati? Not bad for a kid with ten major operations
who was told fi ve times he wouldn’t make it through the
night, spent 1.5 years out of 3 in the hospital, and had a
tracheostomy for 3 years and a feeding tube in his stomach
for 1.5 years! Truly, a miracle.
My advice to your students: Attitudes, beliefs, friends,
and strangers (all unknowingly) play a role in survival and
recovery. Be positive. Do not dwell on the negative. Ask
for and focus on recovery. It will be given to you. Life can
change in a mere instant. Don’t look forward and don’t
look back. Enjoy what you have and be thankful for everything.
See the sunrise. Smell a rose. Experience a hug,
and ask God for help when you need it.”
Stress with a Human Face
Additional Coping Techniques
335
Research on Prayer and Faith
With regard to scientifi c inquiry, there is no lack of
studies on the healing power of prayer, particularly in
the past two decades. As mentioned in Chapter 7 with
regard to Einstein’s view of spirituality, the most famous
study on prayer was conducted by Randolph Byrd
involving prayers for cardiac patients. Shying away
from the word pray, researchers have coined the more
scientifi c term “intercessory distant healing.” To date,
Byrd’s study has been replicated several times (Sicher
and Targ, 1998; Harris et al., 1999), showing statistical
signifi cance beyond pure chance.
A recent investigation into the effi cacy of prayer by
Herbert Benson and colleagues (2006) at Harvard
Medical Center found that intercessory prayer had no
effect on cardiac bypass patients. Conversely, David
Hodge from Arizona State University compiled empirical
data from more than 17 recent studies on intercessory
prayer. Based on 12 criteria, he concluded that as
an experimental intervention, prayer indeed had a small
but signifi cant effect. Prayer as a mode of compassionate
intentionality is now being studied by several
researchers including Marilyn Schlitz of the Institute of
Noetic Sciences and Lynn McTaggart, author of the
book The Intention Experiment (2007). You can visit
McTaggart’s Web site and participate in this worldwide
study by going to www.theintentionexperiment.com.
Some scientists remark that if divine intervention is scientifi
cally valid some of the time, why not all of the
time? Perhaps the answer is found in the standard joke:
When you pray to God and your prayer isn’t answered,
it isn’t that God didn’t hear you. It’s just that the answer
was “No!”
Are people who pray more healthy? As usual with
research studies, there is proof that lines up on both
sides of the argument. A 2008 study conducted by
Gonnerman and colleagues at the University of
Northern Iowa found that people who attended church
services were more likely to be healthy (e.g., not suffering
from loneliness, depression, or insomnia) than those
who did not. A study by Pressman found similar results
nearly two decades earlier in 1990. Keeping in mind
that science and religion have been at odds for several
hundred years, these fi ndings came under much scrutiny.
In his book The Faith Factor, Matthews cites habitual
attendance at church or synagogue as a factor that
promotes health. Although these fi ndings suggest that a
strong relationship with the divine is certainly healthy,
skeptics argue that religious behavior (attendance) itself
and not belief per se, as well as the support of friends in
church and marital status, are the true health factors. As
was also mentioned in Chapter 7, religious practices are
easy to measure, but spirituality is not. There are those
who are spiritual but not religious, and there are those
who are religious but not spiritual.
Prayers for Non-Believers
Are people who are less than sure about a higher power,
or who perhaps don’t believe in a divine source, divinely
disadvantaged in times of stress? Perhaps not
( FIG. 16.6   ). There is no research that suggests that
agnostics (those who don’t know) and atheists (those
Agnostics: Individuals who do not know if there is
a higher source.
Atheists: Individuals who do not believe in a higher
source.
FIGURE 16.6 (Reprinted with permission from Johnny Hart and Creators Syndicate, Inc.)
Chapter 16
336
who don’t believe in a higher source) fall dead at an earlier
age or are prone to lifelong chronic illnesses. More than
likely the conversation in their heads resembles a style of
nonscripted prayer that might be heard in the heads and
hearts of believers in a higher power. Just as no religion
has a monopoly on the style of prayer that gets the best
results, people of strong faith are not necessarily at an
advantage. Remember that coping with stress involves
changing perceptions that are threatening. Prayer (in
whatever form, whether it be a Hail Mary or a positive
affi rmation) is a way in which to allay the fear involved.
Similarly, faith for believers is trust in the unknown,
whereas faith for non-believers may be viewed as an internal
locus of control. Like prayer, faith is subjective, meaning
that it comes from a personal experience, not something
learned in a book. Intention is paramount.
Ways to Pray
Is there a right way to pray? Perhaps! You may ponder
this very question should you feel at times that your
prayers have not been answered. Author Sophie
Burnham (The Path of Prayer) states that the style of
communication is very important in the process of
prayer. Burnham hypothesizes that people are rarely
taught to pray correctly, and she offers the following
guidelines to practice this coping skill most effectively
so that these thoughts may be received as intended.
1. Clear transmission of prayer thoughts is crucial to
delivery of the message. A mind cluttered with
several thoughts is analogous to a radio tuned to
static. Clearing your mind of all thoughts save
that which necessitates attention is imperative to
the prayer process. There is no sacred place to
pray. It may help to fi nd a quiet spot, but temples,
churches, and mosques are no better a conduit for
this form of communication than your bedroom,
shower, or car.
2. Prayers, Burnham explains, must be expressed in
the present tense. With divine energy, as expressed
by Jung as the collective unconscious, by Einstein
as the cosmos, or by whatever term you wish to
use, time does not exist. It is a human-made concept,
a fabrication of the human mind. Therefore,
past tense and future tense are not understood.
Prayers as thought forms must be expressed in
the present moment.
3. Burnham writes that prayers must be phrased in a
positive context and not a negative one. The universe,
she states, does not understand the words not, can’t,
and don’t. When a prayer such as “Don’t let me do
badly on this exam” is expressed in negative terms, it
is interpreted as “let me do badly on this exam.”
Similarly, the unconscious mind does not recognize
negative words. Stress therapist Joan Borysenko
tells a story of an Australian friend who lost a leg to
bone cancer and who was subsequently given a few
months to live. Twenty years later this gentleman is
enjoying life to the fullest. She explained that his
coping mechanism focused on positive rather than
on negative thoughts; instead of thinking, “I can’t
die,” he thought, “I must live.” Like Burnham,
Borysenko insists that the un conscious mind does
not recognize negative verbs.
Burnham adds to this list that special attention be made
to notice the response. She says that in many cases people
ignore or deny the response because the prayer or
the timing of it was not answered to one’s liking. One’s
style of prayer may be a function of one’s personality
type. Research by the Spindrift Organization in Salem,
Oregon, suggests that introverts and extroverts tend to
organize their prayer thoughts in different ways (Sweet,
2007). The prayer style of extroverts tends to be more
goal oriented, while introverts are noted as being more
general (e.g., Thy will be done, or go with the fl ow),
with both styles showing effectiveness.
There are those who hesitate to include prayer as a viable
coping strategy because they believe that it nurtures false
(negative) hope and perhaps even encourages an external
locus of control, both of which are thought to negate the
premise of positive coping techniques. However, it is held
by those who do believe in prayer as a viable coping strategy
that it can draw upon those inner resources that contribute
to dealing with stress successfully. In the words of
Jackson H. Brown, “Do not pray for things, but rather
pray for wisdom and courage.” When prayer is used as a
means to strengthen faith and provide hope, it can be an
effective coping mechanism; in the words of John F.
Kennedy, “God’s work must truly be our own.”
337
Additional Coping Techniques
  No one strategy works for all people in all situations to
cope effectively with the causes of stress. In many cases,
several coping techniques should be used together.
  For a coping technique to be effective, it must do
one or all of the following: increase awareness of the
cause of stress, help process information about the
stressor, and adjust attitude and possibly behavior
to work toward a peaceful resolution.
  Information seeking is a coping technique that helps
to increase awareness of facts regarding the problem
at hand.
  Social orchestration is called the path of least resistance.
The purpose of this technique is to favorably
alter specifi c factors in your environment to minimize
stress, or change environments completely if
current conditions are deleterious to your health.
  When people bond together in times of trouble, they
are better able to cope with the problems at hand.
There is mental, emotional, physical, and spiritual
strength in numbers. Social-support groups provide
coping that individuals cannot generate themselves.
  Avoidance is considered a negative coping technique;
however, to step outside your problems for
a short while to gain a better perspective on them is
thought to be quite healthy. Hobbies can be used as
positive diversion tactics that allow for a healthy release
from daily stressors. When approached in this
way, hobbies can contribute to self-esteem, which
then transfers to other areas of one’s life.
  Stress can induce a sense of personal violation. Harboring
feelings of resentment and anger is a means
of maintaining control over someone we feel has unjustly
attacked us. But when feelings of anger are not
released correctly, they become toxic. Forgive ness
allows these feelings to be released so that a peaceful
resolution is the fi nal outcome.
  Dream therapy—the practice of dream seeding and
dream interpretation to fi nd answers to problems
and decode the meaning of dream symbols and
images, respectively—is a cognitive technique that
has been employed since ancient times. The use of
dreams to resolve problems with the help of the unconscious
mind continues to be used and explored
in the fi eld of psychology as a means to deal with
stress.
  Prayer, the original chat room, is one of the oldest
coping techniques known to humankind.
  Although there are many different ways to pray, intercessory
prayer is the most common type in times
of crisis.
  Prayer and meditation are not the same thing.
  Several research studies on the topic of prayer reveal
a statistical signifi cance with intention, particularly
relative to aspects of health and healing.
  Although there is no one way to pray, suggestions
for intercessory prayer are similar if not identical to
mental imagery (Chapter 20).
  The relationship between stress and spirituality is
gaining more and more attention in the allied health
fi elds. Prayer is defi ned as a thought form directed
toward divine consciousness. In more subtle terms,
prayer is a request to nurture our self-reliance.
1. How does information seeking both reduce and
promote stress?
2. Why are support groups thought to enhance coping
skills?
3. How do hobbies help one to reduce stress?
4. Why is forgiveness considered an effective coping
skill?
5. How can dream therapy help one reduce stress?
6. Why is prayer considered an effective coping
technique?
SUMMARY
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS